FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF FOOD BUSINESSES) REGULATIONS, 2011

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL

Regulation on Title and Commencement:
1.1.1: These regulations may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011.

Regulation on Title and Commencement:
1.1.2: These regulations shall come into force on or after 5th August, 2011.

Regulation on Definitions:
1.2.1: In these regulations unless the context otherwise requires:
1. Regulation on Central Licensing Authority Definition: "Central Licensing Authority" means Designated Officer appointed by the Chief Executive Officer of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India in his capacity as Food Safety Commissioner.
2. Regulation on District Definition: "District" means a revenue district in state and UTs provided that the Commissioner of Food Safety may, for the purpose of this Act, declare any local area as a district on the basis of:
   - Concentration of specific category of food businesses which may need special attention.
   - Risk assessment carried out by the Authority from time to time.
   - Any other specific regulatory requirements.
3. Regulation on Licensing Authority Definition: "Licensing Authority" means the Designated Officer appointed under section 36(i) of the Act by the Commissioner of Food Safety of the state or by the Chief Executive Officer of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India in his capacity as Food Safety Commissioner.
4. Regulation on Petty Food Manufacturer Definition: "Petty Food Manufacturer" means any food manufacturer, who:
   (a) Manufactures or sells any article of food himself or a petty retailer, hawker, itinerant vendor or temporary stall holder; or distributes foods including in any religious or social gathering except a caterer; or
   (b) Such other food businesses including small scale or cottage or such other industries relating to food business or tiny food businesses with an annual turnover not exceeding Rs 12 lakhs and/or whose:
      (i) Production capacity of food (other than milk and milk products and meat and meat products) does not exceed 100 kg/ltr per day; or
      (ii) Procurement or handling and collection of milk is up to 500 litres of milk per day; or
      (iii) Slaughtering capacity is 2 large animals or 10 small animals or 50 poultry birds per day or less.
5. Regulation on Registering Authority Definition: "Registering Authority" means Designated Officer/Food Safety Officer or any official in Panchayat, Municipal Corporation or any other local body or Panchayat in an area, notified as such by the State Food Safety Commissioner for the purpose of registration as specified in these Regulations.
6. Regulation on State Licensing Authority Definition: "State Licensing Authority" means Designated Officers appointed under Section 36(1) of the Act by the Food Safety Commissioner of a State or UT.

CHAPTER 2: LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF FOOD BUSINESS

Regulation on Registration and Licensing of Food Business:
2.1: All Food Business Operators in the country will be registered or licensed in accordance with the procedures laid down hereinafter.

Regulation on Registration of Petty Food Business:
2.1.1:
(1) Every petty Food Business Operator shall register themselves with the Registering Authority by submitting an application for registration in Form A under Schedule 2 of these Regulations along with a fee as provided in Schedule 3.
(2) The petty food manufacturer shall follow the basic hygiene and safety requirements provided in Part I of Schedule 4 of these Regulations and provide a self-attested declaration of adherence to these requirements with the application in the format provided in Annexure-1 under Schedule 2.
(3) The Registering Authority shall consider the application and may either grant registration or reject it with reasons to be recorded in writing or issue notice for inspection, within 7 days of receipt of an application for registration.
(4) In the event of an inspection being ordered, the registration shall be granted by the Registering Authority after being satisfied with the safety, hygiene, and sanitary conditions of the premises as contained in Part I of Schedule 4 within a period of 30 days. If registration is not granted, or denied, or inspection not ordered within 7 days as provided in sub-regulation (3) or no decision is communicated within 30 days as provided in sub-regulation (4), the petty food manufacturer may start its business, provided that it will be incumbent on the Food Business Operator to comply with any improvement suggested by the Registering Authority even later. Provided that registration shall not be refused without giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard and for reasons to be recorded in writing.
(5) The Registering Authority shall issue a registration certificate and a photo identity card, which shall be displayed at a prominent place at all times within the premises or vehicle or cart or any other place where the person carries on sale/manufacture of food in the case of Petty Food Business.
(6) The Registering Authority or any officer or agency specifically authorized for this purpose shall carry out food safety inspection of the registered establishments at least once a year. Provided that a producer of milk who is a registered member of a dairy Cooperative Society registered under the Cooperative Societies Act and supplies or sells the entire milk to the Society shall be exempted from this provision for registration.

Regulation on License for Food Business:
2.1.2:
(1) Subject to Regulation 2.1.1, no person shall commence any food business unless he possesses a valid license. Provided that any person or Food Business Operator carrying on food business on the date of notification of these Regulations, under a license, registration or permission, as the case may be, under the Acts or Orders mentioned in the Second Schedule of the Act shall get their existing license converted into the license/registration under these regulations within sixty months from the date of commencement of these regulations by making an application to the Licensing/Registering Authority after complying with the safety requirements mentioned in the Schedule 4 contained under different Parts dependent on the nature of business. In case of difficulty, the licensing authority with the approval of the Food Safety Commissioner in the State will determine the advisability of applying any specific condition keeping in view the need to ensure the safety of food and public interest. No license fee will have to be paid for the remaining period of the validity of the earlier license or registration granted under any of the said Acts or Orders. Non-compliance with this provision by a Food Business Operator will attract a penalty under section 55 of the Act. Provided further that any food business operator holding Registration/License under any other Act/Order as specified under schedule 2 of the FSS Act, 2006 with no specific validity or expiry date, and otherwise entitled to obtain a license under these regulations, shall have to apply and obtain a Registration/License under these Regulations within sixty months from the date of commencement of these regulations by paying the applicable fees. Provided also that in case of difficulty, the licensing/registration authority with the approval of the Food Safety Commissioner in the State will determine the advisability of applying any specific condition keeping in view the need to ensure the safety of food and public interest. Non-compliance with the above provisions by a food business operator shall attract a penalty as provided under section 55 of the Act.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Regulation 2.1.2(1) above or in any of the registration or license certificates issued under existing Acts or Orders mentioned in the second schedule of the Act, the Licensing Authority, if it has reason to believe that the Food Business Operator has failed to comply with all or any of the conditions of the existing registration or license or the safety requirements given in Schedule 4, may give appropriate direction to the Food Business Operator to comply with.
(3) License for commencing or carrying on food business, which falls under Schedule 1, shall be granted by the Central Licensing Authority, provided that Food Authority may through notification make such changes or modify the list given in the Schedule I as considered necessary.
(4) License for commencing or carrying on food business, which is not covered under Schedule 1, shall be granted by the concerned State/UT’s Licensing Authority.
(5) The Food Business Operator shall ensure that all conditions of the license as provided in Annexure 3 of Form B in Schedule 2 and safety, sanitary, and hygienic requirements provided in Schedule 4 contained under different Parts depending on the nature of the business are complied with at all times. Provided that the Licensing Authority shall ensure periodical food safety audit and inspection of the licensed establishments through its own or agencies authorized for this purpose by the FSSAI. Provided further that no person shall manufacture, import, sell, stock, exhibit for distribution or sale any article of food which has been subjected to the treatment of irradiation, except under a license obtained from the Department of Atomic Energy under the Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of Food) Regulations, 1996.

Regulation on Application for License to the Licensing Authority:
2.1.3: An application for the grant of a license shall be made in Form B of Schedule 2 to the concerned Licensing Authority as specified in Regulation 2.1.2(3) and 2.1.2(4) and it will be accompanied by a self-attested declaration in the format provided in the Annexure-1 and copies of documents mentioned in Annexure 2 of Schedule-2 along with the applicable fees prescribed in Schedule 3.

Regulation on Processing of Application for License:
2.1.4:
(1) A license shall, subject to the provisions of these Regulations, be issued by the concerned Licensing Authority within a period of 60 days from the date of issue of an application ID number as provided in subsection (3) below.
(2) If, upon scrutiny of the application within 15 days from the date of receipt of the application, the concerned Licensing Authority requires any additional information with respect to an application or if the application is incomplete, the Licensing Authority shall inform the applicant in writing, to furnish such additional information or complete the application, as the case may be, within 30 days from such notice. In case the applicant fails to furnish the required information within the stipulated time of 30 days, the application for the license shall stand rejected.
(3) On the receipt of a complete application including the additional information if asked for, the Licensing Authority shall issue an Application ID number to each applicant that will be referred to in all future correspondence between the Licensing Authority and the applicant.
(4) After the issue of Application ID number, the Licensing Authority may direct the Food Safety Officer or any other person or agency specially designated for such functions to inspect the premises in the manner prescribed by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India in accordance with these Regulations. Such Inspecting Officer or person may issue a notice to the applicant, if it deems fit, guiding the food business operator on necessary steps to be taken or changes or alterations to be made in the premises in order to ensure general sanitary and hygienic conditions as specified in Schedule 4. The applicant shall carry out the required steps, changes or alterations and intimate the Licensing Authority within 30 days or such period as may be allowed by the Licensing Authority.
(5) Within a period of 30 days from receipt of an inspection report excluding the time taken by the applicant in complying with the advice, if any, given in the inspection report and verification thereof, the concerned Licensing Authority shall consider the application and may either grant license or reject the application. Provided that before refusing license an applicant shall be given an opportunity of being heard and the reasons for refusal shall be recorded in writing.
(6) The Licensing Authority shall issue a License in Format C under Schedule 2 of these Regulations, a true copy of which shall be displayed at a prominent place at all times within the premises where the Food Business Operator carries on the food business.

Regulation on Procedure for License in Certain Local Areas:
2.1.5:
(1) A single license may be issued by the Licensing Authority for one or more articles of food and also for different establishments or premises in the same local area including collection and chilling units run by milk cooperatives or its members.
(2) The Chief Executive Officer of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India in the capacity of Food Safety Commissioner may appoint a Designated Officer or Food Safety Officer for Central Government organizations like Railways, Defense, etc., which have a large number of food establishments, to ensure food safety in those establishments and to ensure that all other conditions laid down for running food business under the Act and these Regulations are complied with. Provided further that the Food Authority may carry out a food safety audit of these establishments once a year through its own or accredited agencies.

Regulation on Commencement of Business:
2.

1.6: An applicant may commence his food business and the concerned licensing Authority shall not deny the applicant to commence such business if, from the date of making the completed application, a license is not issued within 60 days or the applicant has not received any intimation of inadequacy under Regulation 2.1.4(2) or inspection report indicating defects from the concerned Licensing Authority under Regulation 2.1.4(4).

Regulation on Validity and Renewal of Registration and License:
2.1.7:
(1) A Registration or license granted under these Regulations shall be valid and subsisting, unless otherwise specified, for a period of 1 to 5 years as chosen by the Food Business Operator, from the date of issue of registration or license subject to remittance of fee applicable for the period and compliance with all conditions of the license.
(2) Any application for the renewal of a registration or license granted under these Regulations shall be made in Form A or B of Schedule 2, as the case may be, not later than 30 days prior to the expiry date indicated in the license.
(3) The Registration or License shall continue to be in force till such time that the orders are passed on the renewal application which in no case shall be beyond 30 days from the date of expiry of registration or license.
(4) Any renewal application filed beyond the period mentioned under Regulation 2.1.7(2) above but before the expiry date, shall be accompanied by a late fee of Rs 100 per day for each day of delay. Provided that in case of registration, late fee of Rs. 100 per day for each day of delay shall not be applicable.
(5) Any Registration or license for which renewal has not been applied for within the period mentioned in Regulation 2.1.7(2) or 2.1.7(4) above shall expire and the Food Business Operator shall stop all business activity at the premises. The Food Business Operator will have to apply for fresh Registration or license as provided in Regulation 2.1.1 and 2.1.3 as the case may be if it wants to restart the business.
(6) Food Business Operator having a valid certificate of an accredited food safety auditor or from an agency accredited by Food Authority or any other organization notified by Food Authority for this purpose will not be normally required to be inspected before renewal of the license. Provided that the Designated Officer may order an inspection before renewal if considered necessary for reasons to be recorded in writing.


CHAPTER 2: LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF FOOD BUSINESS

Regulation 2.1: Registration and Licensing of Food Business

Regulation 2.1.1: Registration of Petty Food Business
1. Every petty Food Business Operator shall register with the Registering Authority by submitting an application in Form A under Schedule 2 along with a fee as provided in Schedule 3.
2. The petty food manufacturer shall follow the basic hygiene and safety requirements in Part I of Schedule 4 and provide a self-attested declaration of adherence with the application as per Annexure-1 under Schedule 2.
3. The Registering Authority shall consider the application and may grant or reject registration, or issue notice for inspection, within 7 days of receipt.
4. If an inspection is ordered, registration will be granted after verifying safety, hygiene, and sanitary conditions of the premises as specified in Part I of Schedule 4 within 30 days.
5. The Registering Authority shall issue a registration certificate and photo ID card, which shall be displayed prominently within the premises or vehicle/cart.
6. The Registering Authority or any authorized officer/agency shall carry out food safety inspections of registered establishments at least once a year.

Regulation 2.1.2: License for Food Business
1. No person shall commence food business without a valid license. Existing businesses must convert their license under these regulations within sixty months.
2. License for businesses under Schedule 1 shall be granted by the Central Licensing Authority, while others will be by the respective State/UT Licensing Authority.
3. Food Business Operators must comply with all license conditions and safety, sanitary, and hygienic requirements in Schedule 4.
4. Periodic food safety audits and inspections will be conducted by the Licensing Authority or authorized agencies.
5. No person shall manufacture, import, sell, stock, exhibit for distribution, or sell irradiated food without a license from the Department of Atomic Energy.

Regulation 2.1.3: Application for License
1. Application for a license shall be made in Form B of Schedule 2 to the concerned Licensing Authority and must include the documents in Annexure 2 of Schedule 2, along with applicable fees.

Regulation 2.1.4: Processing of Application for License
1. License shall be issued within 60 days from the date of issuing an application ID number.
2. Additional information may be requested within 15 days from receipt of application. Applicant must furnish information within 30 days.
3. Application ID number will be issued upon receipt of complete application.
4. Premises inspection may be directed within a reasonable period and must be rectified by the applicant as per inspection report.
5. License may be granted or rejected within 30 days from inspection report receipt. Refusal requires a hearing and recorded reasons.
6. License in Format C under Schedule 2 shall be displayed prominently.

Regulation 2.1.5: License in Certain Local Areas
1. A single license may cover multiple articles of food and establishments in the same area.
2. Special officers may be appointed for organizations with multiple establishments, like Railways and Defense, to ensure food safety.

Regulation 2.1.6: Commencement of Business
1. Business may commence if the license is not issued within 60 days or no deficiency notice is received from the Licensing Authority.

Regulation 2.1.7: Validity and Renewal of Registration and License
1. Registration or license is valid for 1 to 5 years as chosen by the Food Business Operator.
2. Renewal application should be made 30 days before expiry.
3. Registration or license continues in force till renewal decision, which must be within 30 days from expiry.
4. Late renewal attracts Rs 100 per day beyond the period mentioned.
5. Failure to renew will require fresh application and business cessation.
6. Accredited food safety auditors’ certificates may exempt pre-renewal inspection unless deemed necessary.

Regulation 2.1.8: Suspension or Cancellation of Registration Certificate or License
1. The Registering or Licensing Authority may suspend a registration or license after giving the Food Business Operator an opportunity to be heard, if the conditions of an Improvement Notice under Section 32 are not met. Reasons must be recorded and communicated to the operator.
2. Inspection of the premises may be directed within 14 days from suspension.
3. If defects are not rectified after inspection, the license/registration may be canceled after providing an opportunity to show cause as per Section 32(3) of the Act.
4. Registration or license may be suspended or canceled immediately for public health reasons.
5. No compensation or fee refund is provided for suspension or cancellation.
6. Fresh application for registration or license can be made after 3 months from cancellation, if all improvement notice observations are complied with.

Regulation 2.1.9: Modifications, Expansion or Changes in Premises
1. Food Business Operators must inform the Registering or Licensing Authority of any changes in their business establishment before changes occur.
2. Changes altering license information require prior approval and an amended license after submitting the original license and a fee equivalent to one year’s license fee. Inspection may be ordered before approval.

Regulation 2.1.10: Mode of Payment
1. Fees and charges payable under these regulations shall be paid via pay order, demand draft, or online payment as prescribed by the Food Safety Commissioner.

Regulation 2.1.11: Transfer of Registration Certificate or License in Case of Death
1. The registration certificate or license remains valid for the legal representative or family member of the deceased for 90 days or longer if allowed by the Designated Officer.
2. Legal representatives or family members must apply for transfer of the certificate or license.
3. The authority may approve or refuse the transfer after inquiry, with refusal requiring a hearing and recorded reasons.
4. Registration or license remains valid pending transfer decision.

Regulation 2.1.12: Appeal
1. A Food Business Operator aggrieved by an order under these Regulations may appeal to the Designated Officer or Food Safety Commissioner as per Sections 31(8) and 32(4)-(5) of the Act.

Regulation 2.1.13: Return
1. Every manufacturer and importer with a license must submit an annual return by 31st May in ‘Form D-1’ to the Licensing Authority.
2. Milk product manufacturers must file half-yearly returns within a month from the period end.
3. Separate returns are required for each license held.
4. Late returns beyond 31st May attract Rs 100 per day penalty.

Regulation 2.1.14: Compliance with Directions or Orders
1. Food Business Operators must comply with all directions or orders issued under these regulations, with non-compliance attracting legal action.
2. Manufacturers, distributors, or dealers must provide a warranty in Form E when selling food articles.

Regulation 2.1.15: Advisory Committee Constitution by State/UT Governments
1. State/UT Governments may designate or constitute advisory committees at panchayat/district/state level to assist in food safety matters.

Regulation 2.1.16: Jurisdiction of Designated Officer
1. The Commissioner of Food Safety shall appoint a Designated Officer for food safety administration in each district.


SCHEDULE 1
[See Regulation 2.1.2 (3)]

List of Food Business Falling Under the Purview of Central Licensing Authority

Regulation S1.1: Dairy Units
I. Dairy units including milk chilling units equipped to handle or process more than 50,000 litres of liquid milk/day or 2500 MT of milk solid per annum.

Regulation S1.2: Vegetable Oil Processing Units
II. Vegetable oil processing units and units producing vegetable oil by the process of solvent extraction and refineries including oil expeller unit having installed capacity more than 2 MT per day.

Regulation S1.3: Slaughter Houses
III. All slaughter houses equipped to slaughter more than 50 large animals or 150 or more small animals including sheep and goats or 1000 or more poultry birds per day.

Regulation S1.4: Meat Processing Units
IV. Meat processing units equipped to handle or process more than 500 kg of meat per day or 150 MT per annum.

Regulation S1.5: Other Food Processing Units
V. All food processing units other than mentioned under (I) to (IV) including relabellers and repackers having installed capacity more than 2 MT/day except grains, cereals and pulses milling units.

Regulation S1.6: Export Oriented Units
VI. 100% Export Oriented Units.

Regulation S1.7: Importers
VII. All Importers importing food items including food ingredients and additives for commercial use.

Regulation S1.8: Novel Foods
VIII. All food business operators manufacturing any article of food containing ingredients or substances or using technologies or processes or combination thereof whose safety has not been established through these regulations or which do not have a history of safe use or food containing ingredients which are being introduced for the first time into the country.

Regulation S1.9: Multi-State Operators
IX. Food Business Operator operating in two or more states.

Regulation S1.10: Catering Services under Central Government Agencies
X. Food catering services in establishments and units under Central government Agencies like Railways, Air and airport, Seaport, Defence etc.



Annexure-2
Documents to be Enclosed for New Application for License to State/Central Licensing Authority

1. Regulation A2.1: Application Form
   - Form-B duly completed and signed (in duplicate) by the proprietor/partner or the authorised signatory.

2. Regulation A2.2: Blueprint/Layout Plan
   - Blueprint/layout plan of the processing unit showing the dimensions in metres/square metres and operation-wise area allocation.

3. Regulation A2.3: List of Directors
   - List of Directors with full address and contact details.

4. Regulation A2.4: Equipment and Machinery List
   - Name and list of equipments and machinery along with the number, installed capacity and horse power used.

5. Regulation A2.5: Photo ID and Address Proof
   - Photo I.D and address proof issued by Government authority of Proprietor/Partner/Director(s)/Authorised Signatory.

6. Regulation A2.6: List of Food Categories
   - List of food category desired to be manufactured (in case of manufacturers).

7. Regulation A2.7: Authority Letter
   - Authority letter with name and address of responsible person nominated by the manufacturer along with alternative responsible person indicating the powers vested with them (e.g., assisting officers in inspections, collection of samples, packing & dispatch).

8. Regulation A2.8: Water Analysis Report
   - Analysis report (chemical & bacteriological) of water to be used as ingredient in food from a recognized/public health laboratory confirming portability.

9. Regulation A2.9: Proof of Premises Possession
   - Proof of possession of premises (sale deed/rent agreement/electricity bill, etc.).

10. Regulation A2.10: Partnership Deed/Affidavit/Memorandum & Articles of Association
    - Partnership Deed/Affidavit/Memorandum & Articles of Association towards the constitution of the firm.

11. Regulation A2.11: Cooperative Certificate
    - Copy of certificate obtained under Coop Act - 1861/Multi State Coop Act - 2002 in case of Cooperatives.

12. Regulation A2.12: NOC from Manufacturer (for Re-labellers)
    - NOC from manufacturer in case of re-labellers.

13. Regulation A2.13: Food Safety Management System Plan
    - Food Safety Management System plan or certificate if any.

14. Regulation A2.14: Milk Procurement Plan
    - Source of milk or procurement plan for milk including location of milk collection centres for Milk and Milk Products processing units.

15. Regulation A2.15: Raw Material Source for Meat Processing
    - Source of raw material for meat and meat processing plants.

16. Regulation A2.16: Pesticide Residue Report (Water)
    - Pesticide residues report of water to be used as ingredient in case of units manufacturing packaged drinking water, packaged mineral water and/or carbonated water.

17. Regulation A2.17: Recall Plan
    - Recall plan wherever applicable, with details on product distribution.

18. Regulation A2.18: NOCs
    - NOCs from Municipality or local body and from State Pollution Control Board (except in case of notified industrial area).

Documents for Renewal or Transfer of License Under Other Existing Laws Prior to These Regulations:

1. Regulation A2.19: Change in Documents/Information
   - Any change in documents or information provided during grant of previous license.

2. Regulation A2.20: Food Safety Management System Certificate
   - Certificate or Plan of Food Safety Management System being adopted (for units under Central Licensing it has to be a certificate from accredited agencies).

3. Regulation A2.21: List of Workers
   - List of workers with their medical fitness certificates.

4. Regulation A2.22: Technical Personnel Details
   - Name, qualification, and details of technical personnel in charge of operation.



Annexure-3
Conditions of License

Regulation A3.1: License Display
1. Display a true copy of the license granted in Form C at all times at a prominent place in the premises.

Regulation A3.2: Access for Inspection
2. Give necessary access to Licensing Authorities or their authorized personnel to the premises.

Regulation A3.3: Informing Authorities of Changes
3. Inform Authorities about any change or modifications in activities/content of license.

Regulation A3.4: Employment of Technical Person
4. Employ at least one technical person to supervise the production process. The person supervising the production process shall have a degree in Science with Chemistry/Bio Chemistry/Food and Nutrition/Microbiology or a related field from a recognized university or institute.

Regulation A3.5: Periodic Returns
5. Furnish periodic annual return (1st April to 31st March), within up to 31st May of each year. For collection/handling/manufacturing of Milk and Milk Products, half yearly returns also need to be furnished.

Regulation A3.6: Product Compliance
6. Ensure no product other than indicated in the license/registration is produced in the unit.

Regulation A3.7: Sanitary and Hygienic Standards
7. Maintain sanitary and hygienic standards of the factory and workers as specified in Schedule-4.

Regulation A3.8: Daily Records Maintenance
8. Maintain daily records of production, raw materials utilization, and sales separately.

Regulation A3.9: Raw Material Standards
9. Ensure the source and standards of raw material used are of optimum quality.

Regulation A3.10: Premises Separation
10. Food Business Operators shall not manufacture, store, or expose for sale any food in premises not effectively separated from any privy, urinal, drain, or place of foul waste storage.

Regulation A3.11: Clean-In-Place Systems
11. Ensure Clean-In-Place systems for regular cleaning of machinery and equipment where necessary.

Regulation A3.12: Contaminant Testing
12. Ensure testing of chemical and/or microbiological contaminants in food products at least once in six months.

Regulation A3.13: Supply Chain Temperature Maintenance
13. Maintain required temperatures throughout the supply chain from procurement to consumer.

Regulation A3.14: Record of Transactions
14. Manufacturers, importers, and distributors must buy and sell food products only from/to licensed/registered vendors and maintain records.

Additional Conditions:

Regulation A3.15: Hotel/Restaurant Notice Board
1. Proprietors of hotels, restaurants, and food stalls selling savories, sweets, or other foods shall display a notice board with separate lists of items cooked in different fats.

Regulation A3.16: Cooked Food Notice Board
2. Display a notice board with the nature of articles being exposed for sale.

Regulation A3.17: Register Maintenance for Edible Oils and Fats
3. Manufacturers or wholesale dealers of butter, ghee, vanaspati, edible oils, and other fats shall maintain a register of quantities manufactured, received, or sold.

Regulation A3.18: Laboratory Facility Requirement
4. Producers or manufacturers of vegetable oil, edible oil, and their products must have laboratory facilities for analytical testing.

Regulation A3.19

: Sale/Movement of Solvent-Extracted Oils
5. Sale or movement of solvent-extracted oil, edible groundnut flour, or edible coconut flour must be directly to registered users.

Regulation A3.20: Edible Oil Packaging and Labeling
6. No Food Business Operator shall sell or distribute any edible oil that is not properly packed, marked, and labeled as specified.



Part I - General Hygienic and Sanitary Practices to be Followed by Petty Food Business Operators Applying for Registration  
(See Regulation 2.1.1(2))

Regulation P1.1: Inspection Requirements  
In case inspection of the units is directed by the Registering or Licensing Authority, the inspection should confirm that the following measures are adopted by the unit as far as possible:

 SANITARY AND HYGIENIC REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD MANUFACTURER/PROCESSOR/HANDLER
The place where food is manufactured, processed, or handled shall comply with the following requirements:

Regulation P1.2: Location and Environment
1. The premises shall be located in a sanitary place and free from filthy surroundings and shall maintain an overall hygienic environment. All new units shall be set up away from environmentally polluted areas.

Regulation P1.3: Space Requirements
2. The premises to conduct food business for manufacturing should have adequate space for manufacturing and storage to maintain an overall hygienic environment.

Regulation P1.4: Cleanliness and Ventilation
3. The premises shall be clean, adequately lighted, and ventilated with sufficient free space for movement.

Regulation P1.5: Maintenance of Structures
4. Floors, ceilings, and walls must be maintained in sound condition. They should be smooth and easy to clean with no flaking paint or plaster.

Regulation P1.6: Disinfection and Insect Control
5. The floor and skirted walls shall be washed as per requirement with an effective disinfectant. The premises shall be kept free from all insects. No spraying shall be done during the conduct of business; instead, fly swats/flaps should be used to kill flies entering the premises. Windows, doors, and other openings shall be fitted with net or screen, as appropriate, to make the premise insect-free. The water used in manufacturing shall be potable, and if required, chemical and bacteriological examination of the water shall be done at regular intervals at any recognized laboratory.

Regulation P1.7: Water Supply
6. Continuous supply of potable water shall be ensured in the premises. In case of intermittent water supply, adequate storage arrangements for water used in food or washing shall be made.

Regulation P1.8: Equipment Design and Cleaning
7. Equipment and machinery, when employed, shall be of such design that will permit easy cleaning. Arrangements for cleaning containers, tables, working parts of machinery, etc., shall be provided.

Regulation P1.9: Avoidance of Metallic Contamination
8. No vessel, container, or other equipment, the use of which is likely to cause metallic contamination injurious to health, shall be employed in the preparation, packing, or storage of food. (Copper or brass vessels shall have proper lining).

Regulation P1.10: Equipment Cleanliness
9. All equipment shall be kept clean, washed, dried, and stacked at the close of business to ensure freedom from the growth of mold/fungi and infestation.

Regulation P1.11: Equipment Placement
10. All equipment shall be placed well away from the walls to allow proper inspection.

Regulation P1.12: Drainage System
11. There should be an efficient drainage system and adequate provisions for disposal of refuse.

Regulation P1.13: Worker Hygiene
12. The workers working in processing and preparation shall use clean aprons, hand gloves, and headwear.

Regulation P1.14: Health of Workers
13. Persons suffering from infectious diseases shall not be permitted to work. Any cuts or wounds shall remain covered at all times, and the person should not be allowed to come in direct contact with food.

Regulation P1.15: Hand Hygiene
14. All food handlers shall keep their fingernails trimmed, clean, and wash their hands with soap or detergent and water before commencing work and every time after using the toilet. Scratching of body parts or hair shall be avoided during food handling processes.

Regulation P1.16: Personal Hygiene
15. All food handlers should avoid wearing false nails or other items or loose jewelry that might fall into food and also avoid touching their face or hair.

Regulation P1.17: Prohibited Activities
16. Eating, chewing, smoking, spitting, and nose blowing shall be prohibited within the premises, especially while handling food.

Regulation P1.18: Article Storage
17. All articles that are stored or are intended for sale shall be fit for consumption and have proper cover to avoid contamination.

Regulation P1.19: Transportation Hygiene
18. The vehicles used to transport foods must be maintained in good repair and kept clean.

Regulation P1.20: Temperature Maintenance
19. Foods while in transport in packaged form or in containers shall maintain the required temperature.

Regulation P1.21: Storage of Insecticides/Disinfectants
20. Insecticides/disinfectants shall be kept and stored separately and away from food manufacturing/storing/handling areas.



 SANITARY AND HYGIENIC REQUIREMENTS FOR STREET FOOD VENDORS AND UNITS OTHER THAN MANUFACTURING/PROCESSING

Regulation P2.1: Avoiding Contamination Sources
1. Potential sources of contamination like rubbish, wastewater, toilet facilities, open drains, and stray animals shall be avoided.

Regulation P2.2: Vending Cart Surfaces
2. The surfaces of the vending carts that come in contact with food or food storage utensils shall be built of solid, rust/corrosion-resistant materials and kept in clean and good condition. They shall be protected from sun, wind, and dust. When not in use, food vending vans shall be kept in a clean place and properly protected.

Regulation P2.3: Rubbish Bins
3. Rubbish bins with covers shall be provided by food stall or vending cart owners for any waste generated in the process of serving and eating by consumers.

Regulation P2.4: Working Surfaces
4. Working surfaces of vending carts shall be clean, hygienic, impermeable, and easy to clean (like stainless steel) and placed at least 60 to 70 cm above the ground.

Regulation P2.5: Cleanliness of Sale Points
5. Sale points, tables, awnings, benches, boxes, cupboards, glass cases, etc., shall be clean and tidy.

Regulation P2.6: Cooking Utensils and Crockery
6. Cooking utensils and crockery shall be clean and in good condition. They should not be broken or chipped.

Regulation P2.7: Equipment Cleaning
7. All containers shall be kept clean, washed, and dried at the close of business to ensure that there is no growth of mold/fungi and infestation.

Regulation P2.8: Water Quality
8. Water used for cleaning, washing, and preparing food shall be potable in nature.

Regulation P2.9: Drinking Water Transport
9. Transporting of drinking water (treated water like bottled water, boiled/filtered water through a water purifier, etc.) shall be in properly covered and protected containers and stored in clean and covered containers in a protected area away from dust and filth.

Regulation P2.10: Utensil Material
10. Cooking, storage, and serving shall not be done in utensils made of cadmium, lead, non-food grade plastic, and other toxic materials.

Regulation P2.11: Utensil Cleaning Process
11. Utensils shall be cleaned of debris, rinsed, scrubbed with detergent, and washed under running tap water after every operation. Wiping of utensils shall be done with a clean cloth. Separate cloths shall be used for wiping hands and for cleaning surfaces. Cloths used for floor cleaning will not be used for cleaning surfaces of tables and working areas and for wiping utensils. The person cooking, handling, or serving food should use hand gloves and aprons, where necessary. They shall wear headgear and cover their mouth always while at work.

Regulation P2.12: Dust Removal
12. Removing dust or crumbs from plates or utensils shall be done using a cloth or wiper into a dustbin.

Regulation P2.13: Health of Workers
13. Persons suffering from infectious diseases shall not be permitted to work.

Regulation P2.14: Worker Hygiene
14. All food handlers shall remain clean, wear washed clothes, and keep their fingernails trimmed, clean, and wash their hands with soap/detergent and water before commencing work and every time after touching food or using the toilet.

Regulation P2.15: Personal Hygiene
15. All food handlers should avoid wearing loose items that might fall into food and also avoid touching or scratching their face, head, or hair.

Regulation P2.16: Article Storage
16. All articles that are stored or intended for sale shall have proper cover to avoid contamination. Food should be stored only in food-grade plastic containers as steel containers to prevent leaking.

Regulation P2.17: Prohibited Activities
17. Eating, chewing, smoking, spitting, and nose blowing shall be prohibited within the premises.

Regulation P2.18: Leftover Food Management
18. Foods shall be prepared or cooked as per the day's requirement to avoid leftovers, which might be used the next day without ascertaining their safety for consumption. Consumables left over shall be kept in the refrigerator immediately after their intended use.

Regulation P2.19: Storage Racks
19. Adequate number of racks shall be provided for storage of articles of food, with clear identity of

 each commodity. Proper compartments for each class shall also be provided wherever possible so that there is no cross-contamination.

Regulation P2.20: Garbage Management
20. Rubbish or garbage bins shall have tight covers and shall be cleaned every day by transferring contents into designated locations.

Regulation P2.21: Food Segregation
21. Vegetarian and non-vegetarian items should be segregated.

Regulation P2.22: Refrigerator Maintenance
22. The fridge should be cleaned at least once a week to remove stains, ice particles, and food particles. The temperature in the fridge should be in the range of 4°C - 6°C.

Regulation P2.23: Location Approval
23. The location of the vending unit should be in a place approved by the local authorities and not block traffic or pedestrians or be near unhygienic locations.


Part II  
(See Regulation 2.1.1(4))  
General Requirements on Hygienic and Sanitary Practices to be followed by all Food Business Operators applying for License

The establishment in which food is being handled, processed, manufactured, packed, stored, and distributed by the food business operator and the persons handling them should conform to the sanitary and hygienic requirements, food safety measures, and other standards as specified below. It shall also be deemed to be the responsibility of the food business operator to ensure adherence to necessary requirements. In addition to the requirements specified below, the food business operator shall identify steps in the activities of food business, which are critical to ensure food safety, and ensure that safety procedures are identified, implemented, maintained, and reviewed periodically.

 LOCATION AND SURROUNDINGS

Regulation P2.1: Environmental Pollution Avoidance
1. Food Establishment shall ideally be located away from environmental pollution and industrial activities that produce disagreeable or obnoxious odour, fumes, excessive soot, dust, smoke, chemical or biological emissions, and pollutants, and which pose a threat of contaminating food areas that are prone to infestations of pests or where wastes, either solid or liquid, cannot be removed effectively.

Regulation P2.2: Protection from Nearby Hazards
2. In case there are hazards of other environment polluting industry located nearby, appropriate measures should be taken to protect the manufacturing area from any potential contamination.

Regulation P2.3: Separation from Residential Areas
3. The manufacturing premise should not have direct access to any residential area.

 LAYOUT AND DESIGN OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENT PREMISES

Regulation P2.4: Cross-Contamination Prevention
1. As far as possible, the layout of the food establishment shall be such that food preparation/manufacturing processes are not amenable to cross-contamination from other pre and post manufacturing operations like goods receiving, pre-processing (e.g., packaging, washing/portioning of ready-to-eat food).

Regulation P2.5: Maintenance of Floors, Ceilings, and Walls
2. Floors, ceilings, and walls must be maintained in a sound condition to minimize the accumulation of dirt, condensation, and growth of undesirable molds. They should be made of impervious material and should be smooth and easy to clean with no flaking paint or plaster.

Regulation P2.6: Door Material and Maintenance
3. Doors shall also be made of smooth and non-absorbent surfaces so that they are easy to clean and, wherever necessary, disinfect.

Regulation P2.7: Proper Drainage
4. The floor of the food processing/food service area shall have adequate and proper drainage and shall be easy to clean and, where necessary, disinfect. Floors shall be sloped appropriately to facilitate drainage and the drainage shall flow in a direction opposite to the direction of food preparation/manufacturing process flow.

Regulation P2.8: Insect and Rodent Control
5. Adequate control measures should be in place to prevent insects and rodents from entering the processing area from drains.

Regulation P2.9: Screening of Openings
6. Windows, doors, and all other openings to the outside environment shall be well screened with wire-mesh or insect-proof screens as applicable to protect the premise from flies and other insects/pests/animals. The doors should be fitted with automatic closing springs. The mesh or screen should be of such type that it can be easily removed for cleaning.

Regulation P2.10: Separation from Waste Storage
7. No person shall manufacture, store, or expose for sale or permit the sale of any article of food in any premises not effectively separated to the satisfaction of the licensing authority from any privy, urinal, sullage, drain, or place of storage of foul and waste matter.

 EQUIPMENT & CONTAINERS

Regulation P2.11: Material of Equipment and Containers
1. Equipment and containers that come in contact with food and are used for food handling, storage, preparation, processing, packaging, and serving shall be made of corrosion-free materials which do not impart any toxicity to the food material and should be easy to clean and/or disinfect (other than disposable single-use types).

Regulation P2.12: Maintenance of Utensils and Containers
2. Equipment and utensils used in the preparation of food shall be kept at all times in good order and repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. Such utensil or container shall not be used for any other purpose.

Regulation P2.13: Protection of Food in Utensils
3. Every utensil or container containing any food or ingredient of food intended for sale shall at all times be either provided with a properly fitted cover/lid or with a clean gauze net or other material of texture sufficiently fine to protect the food completely from dust, dirt, flies, and other insects.

Regulation P2.14: Protection from Contaminants
4. No utensil or container used for the manufacture or preparation of or containing any food or ingredient of food intended for sale shall be kept in any place in which such utensil or container is likely, by reason of impure air or dust or any offensive, noxious, or deleterious gas or substance or any noxious or injurious emanations, exhalation, or effluvium, to be contaminated and thereby render the food noxious.

Regulation P2.15: Equipment Location and Design
5. Equipment shall be so located, designed, and fabricated that it permits necessary maintenance and cleaning functions as per its intended use and facilitates good hygiene practices inside the premise, including monitoring and audit.

Regulation P2.16: Cleaning Facilities for Equipment
6. Appropriate facilities for the cleaning and disinfecting of equipment and instruments and wherever possible cleaning in place (CIP) system shall be adopted.

Regulation P2.17: Identification and Construction of Waste Containers
7. Equipment and containers for waste, by-products, and inedible or dangerous substances shall be specifically identifiable and suitably constructed.

Regulation P2.18: Separation of Chemical Containers
8. Containers used to hold cleaning chemicals and other dangerous substances shall be identified and stored separately to prevent malicious or accidental contamination of food.

Regulation P2.19: Wastewater Disposal
9. If required, a wastewater disposal system/effluent treatment plant shall be put in place.

Regulation P2.20: Maintenance of Contact Items
10. All items, fittings, and equipment that touch or come in contact with food must be kept in good condition in a way that enables them to be kept clean and, wherever necessary, to be disinfected. Chipped enameled containers will not be used. Stainless steel/aluminum/glass containers, mugs, jugs, trays, etc. suitable for cooking and storing shall be used. Brass utensils shall be frequently provided with lining.

 FACILITIES

Regulation P2.21: Water Supply
1. Only potable water, with appropriate facilities for its storage and distribution, shall be used as an ingredient in processing and cooking.

Regulation P2.22: Water Quality for Handling
2. Water used for food handling, washing, should be of such quality that it does not introduce any hazard or contamination to render the finished food article unsafe.

Regulation P2.23: Cleaning Water Storage Tanks
3. Water storage tanks shall be cleaned periodically and records of the same shall be maintained in a register.

Regulation P2.24: Non-Potable Water Use
4. Non-potable water can be used provided it is intended only for cleaning of equipment not coming in contact with food, steam production, firefighting, and refrigeration equipment, and provided that pipes installed for this purpose preclude the use of this water for other purposes and present no direct or indirect risk of contamination of the raw material, dairy products, or food products so processed, packed, and kept in the premise.

Regulation P2.25: Distinguishing Non-Potable Water Pipes
5. Non-potable water pipes shall be clearly distinguished from those in use for potable water.

Regulation P2.26: Cleaning Facilities for Utensils and Equipment
6. Adequate facilities for cleaning and disinfecting utensils and equipment shall be provided. The facilities must have an adequate supply of hot and cold water if required.

Regulation P2.27: Washing Raw Materials
7. Adequate facilities for washing raw food should be provided. Every sink (or other facilities) for washing food must have an adequate supply of hot and/or cold water. These facilities must be kept clean and, where necessary, disinfected. Preferably, sinks used for washing raw foods shall be kept separate and not used for washing utensils or any other purposes.

Regulation P2.28: Ice and Steam Quality
8. Ice and steam used in direct contact with food shall be made from potable water and shall comply with requirements specified under Regulation P2.21. Ice and steam shall be produced, handled, and stored in such a manner that no contamination can occur.

Regulation P2.29: Drainage and Waste Disposal
9. Food waste and other waste materials shall be removed periodically from the place where food is being handled or cooked or manufactured to avoid buildup. A refuse bin of adequate size with a proper cover, preferably one that need not be touched for opening, shall be provided in the premises for collection of waste material. This shall be emptied and washed daily with a disinfectant and dried before next use.

Regulation P2.30: Sewage and Effluent Disposal
10. The disposal of sewage and effluents (solid, liquid, and gas) shall be in conformity

 with requirements of the Factory/Environment Pollution Control Board. Adequate drainage, waste disposal systems, and facilities shall be provided and designed and constructed in such manner that the risk of contaminating food or the potable water supply is eliminated.

Regulation P2.31: Waste Storage Location
11. Waste storage shall be located in such manner that it does not contaminate the food process, storage areas, the environment inside and outside the food establishment, and waste shall be kept in covered containers and removed at regular intervals.

Regulation P2.32: Periodic Waste Disposal
12. Periodic disposal of refuse/waste should be made compulsory. No waste shall be kept open inside the premise and shall be disposed of in an appropriate manner as per local rules and regulations, including those for plastics and other non-environment friendly materials.

Regulation P2.33: Personnel Facilities and Toilets
13. Personnel facilities shall include those for proper washing and drying of hands before touching food materials, including wash basins and a supply of hot and/or cold water as appropriate; separate lavatories, of appropriate hygienic design, for males and females separately; and changing facilities for personnel. Such facilities shall be suitably located so that they do not open directly into food processing, handling, or storage areas.

Regulation P2.34: Adequate Number of Toilets
14. The number of toilets should be adequate depending on the number of employees (male/female) in the establishment, and they should be made aware of the cleanliness requirement while handling food.

Regulation P2.35: Rest and Refreshment Rooms
15. Rest and refreshments rooms shall be separate from food process and service areas, and these areas shall not lead directly to food production, service, and storage areas.

Regulation P2.36: Display Board for Workers
16. A display board mentioning do's & don'ts for the workers shall be put up inside at a prominent place in the premise in English or in the local language for everyone's understanding.

Regulation P2.37: Air Quality and Ventilation
17. Ventilation systems, natural and/or mechanical, including air filters and exhaust fans wherever required, shall be designed and constructed so that air does not flow from contaminated areas to clean areas.

Regulation P2.38: Lighting
18. Natural or artificial lighting shall be provided to the food establishment to enable the employees/workers to operate in a hygienic manner. Lighting fixtures must, wherever appropriate, be protected to ensure that food is not contaminated by breakages of electrical fittings.

 FOOD OPERATIONS AND CONTROLS

Regulation P2.39: Procurement of Raw Materials
1. No raw material or ingredient thereof shall be accepted by an establishment if it is known to contain parasites, undesirable micro-organisms, pesticides, veterinary drugs or toxic items, decomposed or extraneous substances, which would not be reduced to an acceptable level by normal sorting and/or processing.

Regulation P2.40: Compliance with Standards
2. All raw materials, food additives, and ingredients, wherever applicable, shall conform to all the Regulations and standards laid down under the Act.

Regulation P2.41: Record Maintenance
3. Records of raw materials, food additives, and ingredients as well as their source of procurement shall be maintained in a register for inspection.

Regulation P2.42: Physical Check and Cleaning
4. All raw materials should be checked and cleaned physically thoroughly.

Regulation P2.43: Purchase Quantities
5. Raw materials should be purchased in quantities that correspond to storage/preservation capacity.

Regulation P2.44: Checking Packaged Raw Material
6. Packaged raw material must be checked for 'expiry date', 'best before', or 'use by' date, packaging integrity, and storage conditions.

Regulation P2.45: Receiving Temperature for High Risk Food
7. The receiving temperature of potentially high-risk food should be at or below 5°C.

Regulation P2.46: Receiving Temperature for Frozen Food
8. The receiving temperature of frozen food should be -18°C or below.

Regulation P2.47: Storage Facilities Design
1. Food storage facilities shall be designed and constructed to enable food to be effectively protected from contamination during storage; permit adequate maintenance and cleaning to avoid pest access and accumulation.

Regulation P2.48: Cold Storage Facility
2. Cold storage facility, wherever required, shall be provided to raw, processed, or packed food according to the type and requirement.

Regulation P2.49: Segregation in Storage
3. Segregation shall be provided for the storage of raw, processed, rejected, recalled, or returned materials or products which will be distinguishably marked and secured. Raw materials and food shall be stored in separate areas from printed packaging materials, stationary, hardware, and cleaning materials/chemicals.

Regulation P2.50: Separate Storage for Raw Food
4. Raw food, particularly meat, poultry, and seafood products, shall be cold-stored separately from the area of work-in-progress, processed, cooked, and packaged products. The conditions of storage in terms of temperature and humidity requisite for enhancing the shelf life of the respective food materials/products shall be maintained.

Regulation P2.51: Stock Rotation Systems
5. Storage of raw materials, ingredients, work-in-progress, and processed/cooked or packaged food products shall be subject to FIFO (First In, First Out) and FEFO (First Expire, First Out) stock rotation systems as applicable.

Regulation P2.52: Non-Toxic Storage Containers
6. Containers made of non-toxic materials shall be provided for storage of raw materials, work-in-progress, and finished/ready-to-serve products. The food materials shall be stored on racks/pallets such that they are reasonably well above the floor level and away from the wall to facilitate effective cleaning and prevent harboring any pests, insects, or rodents.

 FOOD PROCESSING/PREPARATION, PACKAGING, AND DISTRIBUTION/SERVICE

Regulation P2.53: Time and Temperature Control
1. The food business shall develop and maintain systems to ensure that time and temperature are controlled effectively where it is critical to the safety and suitability of food. Such control shall include the time and temperature of receiving, processing, cooking, cooling, storage, packaging, distribution, and food service up to the consumer, as applicable.

Regulation P2.54: Handling Frozen Food
2. Whenever frozen food/raw materials are being used/handled/transported, proper care should be taken so that defrosted/thawed material is not stored back after opening for future use.

Regulation P2.55: Thawing Food
3. If thawing is required, then only the required portion of the food should be thawed at a time.

Regulation P2.56: Outlets for Smoke/Steam
4. Wherever cooking is done on open fire, proper outlets for smoke/steam, etc., like chimneys, exhaust fans, etc., shall be provided.




Part V: Food Packaging

Regulation 5.4.1: Packaging Requirements
Packaging materials shall provide protection for all food products to prevent contamination, damage, and shall accommodate required labeling as laid down under the FSS Act & the Regulations thereunder.

Regulation 5.4.2: Use of Food Grade Materials
For primary packaging (i.e., packaging in which the food or ingredient or additive comes in direct contact with the packaging material), only Food grade packaging materials are to be used. Standards to be followed are as mentioned under the FSS Regulations and rules framed thereunder.

Regulation 5.4.3: Non-Toxic Packaging Materials
Packaging materials or gases, where used, shall be non-toxic and shall not pose a threat to the safety and suitability of food under the specified conditions of storage and use.



Part V: Food Distribution / Service

Regulation 5.5.1: Protection During Transportation
All critical links in the supply chain need to be identified and provided for to minimize food spoilage during transportation. Processed/packaged and/or ready-to-eat food shall be protected as per the required storage conditions during transportation and/or service.

Regulation 5.5.2: Maintenance of Temperature and Humidity
Temperatures and humidity necessary for sustaining food safety and quality shall be maintained. Conveyances and/or containers shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to effectively maintain requisite temperature, humidity, atmosphere, and other conditions necessary to protect food. Conveyances and/or containers used for transporting/serving foodstuffs shall be non-toxic, kept clean, and maintained in good condition to protect foodstuffs from contamination.

Regulation 5.5.3: Prevention of Contamination
Receptacles in vehicles and/or containers shall not be used for transporting anything other than foodstuffs where this may result in contamination. Effective cleaning and disinfection shall be carried out between loads when the same conveyance or container is used for transportation of different foods or high-risk foods such as fish, meat, poultry, eggs, etc. For bulk transport of food, containers and conveyances shall be designated and marked for food use only and be used solely for that purpose.



Part VI: Management and Supervision

Regulation 6.1: Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)
A detailed Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for the processing of food as well as its packing, dispatch, and storage will be developed for proper management, aiding in identifying and addressing problems efficiently.

Regulation 6.2: Qualifications for Technical Managers and Supervisors
Technical managers and supervisors must possess appropriate qualifications, knowledge, and skills on food hygiene principles and practices to ensure food safety and quality. They should be able to identify food hazards, take preventive and corrective actions, and ensure effective monitoring and supervision.



Part VII: Food Testing Facilities

Regulation 7.1: Testing Laboratory Requirements
A well-equipped laboratory for testing of food materials/food for physical, microbiological, and chemical analysis in accordance with the specifications/standards laid down under the rules and regulations shall be in place inside the premise for regular/periodic testing and whenever required.

Regulation 7.2: Testing Before Dispatch
In case of any suspicion or possible contamination, food materials/food shall be tested before dispatch from the factory.

Regulation 7.3: External Testing
If there is no in-house laboratory facility, regular testing shall be done through an accredited lab notified by FSSAI. In case of complaints received and if required, the company shall voluntarily conduct testing either in the in-house laboratory or an accredited lab or lab notified by FSSAI.



Part VIII: Audit, Documentation and Records

Regulation 8.1: Periodic Audit
A periodic audit of the whole system according to the SOP shall be done to find any fault/gap in the GMP/GHP system.

Regulation 8.2: Record Keeping
Appropriate records of food processing/preparation, production/cooking, storage, distribution, service, food quality, laboratory test results, cleaning and sanitation, pest control, and product recall shall be kept and retained for a period of one year or the shelf-life of the product, whichever is longer.



Part IX: Sanitation and Maintenance of Establishment Premises

Regulation 9.1: Cleaning and Sanitation Program
A cleaning and sanitation program shall be drawn up and observed, with records properly maintained. It shall indicate specific areas to be cleaned, cleaning frequency, and procedures, including equipment and materials used for cleaning. Equipment used in manufacturing shall be cleaned and sterilized at set frequencies.

Regulation 9.2: Pest Control
9.2.1 Food establishment, including equipment and building, shall be kept in good repair to prevent pest access and eliminate potential breeding sites. Holes, drains, and other access points for pests shall be sealed or fitted with mesh/grills/claddings as required. Animals, birds, and pets shall not be allowed to enter food establishment areas/premises.

9.2.2 Food materials shall be stored in pest-proof containers stacked above the ground and away from walls.

9.2.3 Pest infestations shall be dealt with immediately without adversely affecting food safety or suitability. Treatment with permissible chemical, physical, or biological agents within appropriate limits shall be carried out without posing a threat to food safety or suitability. Records of pesticides/insecticides used, dates, and frequencies shall be maintained.



Part X: Personal Hygiene

Regulation 10.1: Health Status
10.1.1 Personnel known or believed to be suffering from or carriers of diseases or illnesses likely to be transmitted through food shall not be allowed to enter any food handling area. The Food Business shall develop a system where affected persons immediately report illness or symptoms to management. Medical examinations of food handlers shall be carried out, apart from periodic check-ups if clinically or epidemiologically indicated.

10.1.2 Arrangements shall be made to get food handlers/employees medically examined annually to ensure they are free from infectious, contagious, and communicable diseases. Records of these examinations signed by a registered medical practitioner shall be maintained for inspection purposes.

10.1.3 Factory staff shall be vaccinated against enteric diseases as per recommended schedules, with records kept for inspection. During an epidemic, all workers shall be vaccinated irrespective of the scheduled vaccination.

Regulation 10.2: Personal Cleanliness
Food handlers shall maintain high personal cleanliness standards. The food business shall provide adequate and suitable clean protective clothing, head coverings, face masks, gloves, and footwear. Food handlers shall wear only clean protective clothes, head coverings, and footwear daily.

10.2.2 Food handlers shall wash their hands with soap and clean potable water, disinfect their hands, and dry with a hand drier, clean cloth towel, or disposable paper before handling food, after handling raw food or contaminated materials, tools, equipment, or work surfaces to prevent contamination. Food handlers engaged in food handling shall refrain from smoking, spitting, chewing, sneezing, or coughing over any food, whether protected or unprotected, and from eating in food preparation and service areas.

10.2.3 Food handlers shall maintain high standards of personal cleanliness at all times while working directly with and handling raw materials or food products. They shall not smoke, spit, eat, or drink in areas or rooms where raw materials and food products are handled or stored. They shall wash their hands each time work is resumed and whenever their hands are contaminated, e.g., after coughing/sneezing, visiting the toilet, using the telephone, or smoking. They shall avoid certain hand habits that are potentially hazardous when associated with handling food products, effectively washing hands before resuming work after such actions.

10.3 Visitors

10.3.1 Generally, visitors should be discouraged from entering food handling areas. Care must be taken to ensure food safety and hygiene are not compromised due to visitors in floor areas.

10.3.2 The Food Business shall ensure that visitors to its food manufacturing, cooking, preparation, storage, or handling areas, where appropriate, wear protective clothing, footwear, and adhere to other personal hygiene provisions outlined in this section.


Part XI: Product Information and Consumer Awareness

Regulation 11: Labeling Requirements
All packaged food products shall carry a label and requisite information as per provisions of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and Regulations made thereunder. This ensures that adequate and accessible information is available to each person in the food chain to enable them to handle, store, process, prepare, and display the food products safely and correctly. Additionally, the lot or batch can be easily traced and recalled if necessary.



Part XII: Training

Regulation 12.1: Role and Responsibilities of Food Handlers
The Food Business shall ensure that all food handlers are aware of their role and responsibility in protecting food from contamination or deterioration. Food handlers shall have the necessary knowledge and skills relevant to food processing/manufacturing, packing, storing, and serving to ensure food safety and quality.

Regulation 12.2: Training in Food Hygiene and Safety
The Food Business shall ensure that all food handlers are instructed and trained in food hygiene, food safety aspects, and personal hygiene requirements commensurate with their work activities, the nature of food, its handling, processing, preparation, packaging, storage, service, and distribution.

Regulation 12.3: Assessment and Supervision
Periodic assessments of the effectiveness of training, awareness of safety requirements, and competency levels shall be made. Routine supervision and checks ensure that food hygiene and food safety procedures are effectively implemented. Training programs shall be routinely reviewed and updated as necessary.



Part III: Specific Hygienic and Sanitary Practices for Dairy Products

Regulation III.I: Sanitary Requirements for Dairy Establishments

1. Facilities for Hygienic Handling and Protection
Dairy establishments shall have facilities for hygienic handling and protection of raw materials and non-packed or non-wrapped dairy products during loading, unloading, transport, and storing, including Bulk Milk cooling facilities.

2. Watertight Containers and Conduits
Special watertight, non-corrodible containers shall be used for raw materials or dairy products intended for human consumption. Conduits used for removal shall prevent contamination.

3. Waste Water Disposal System
A hygienic and approved waste water disposal system shall be in place.

4. Cleaning and Disinfecting Facilities
Facilities for cleaning and disinfecting tanks used for transporting dairy products and raw milk shall be provided, ensuring cleaning after every use.

5. Prevention of Cross-Contamination
Appropriate measures shall be taken to avoid cross-contamination of dairy products in accordance with specified cleaning programs.

6. Separate Working Areas
Production of heat-treated milk or milk-based products posing contamination risks to other dairy products shall occur in clearly separated working areas.

7. Cleaning and Disinfection of Equipment
Equipment, containers, instruments, and installations coming into contact with dairy products or perishable raw materials shall be cleaned and disinfected according to verified and documented programs.



Regulation III.II: Personal Hygiene Requirements

1. Health Certification
Only persons proven free from medical impediments through a medical certificate shall handle raw materials or dairy products directly.

2. Standards of Personal Cleanliness
Persons handling raw materials or dairy products shall maintain high standards of personal cleanliness. They shall wear suitable, clean working clothes, headgear enclosing hair, and cover wounds with waterproof dressing.

3. Hand Hygiene
Hand washing with soap and clean water shall occur before handling food, after contamination, and after certain actions (e.g., coughing, sneezing, using the toilet).

4. Avoidance of Hazardous Hand Habits
Handlers shall avoid hand habits (e.g., scratching nose, touching hair) that may transfer bacteria to dairy products, ensuring hands are washed before resuming work.



Regulation III.III: Sanitary Requirements for Storage

1. Immediate Placement of Raw Milk
Raw milk shall be placed immediately in a clean area equipped to prevent contamination after procurement.

2. Prohibited Materials for Milk Storage
Cans/containers made of mild steel metal and plastic shall not be used for storage and transportation of milk and milk products.

3. Cooling Requirements
Raw milk brought to dairy plants shall be cooled promptly to 4ºC or lower within specified timeframes.

4. Daily Collection and Cooling
Raw milk collected daily shall be cooled immediately to 4ºC to 6ºC or lower and maintained until processed.

5. Pasteurization and Cooling
Pasteurized milk shall be cooled immediately to 4ºC or lower after the pasteurization process.

6. Storage of Heat-Treated Products
Products not stored at ambient temperatures shall be cooled rapidly to specified temperatures to ensure durability.

7. Temperature Monitoring
Storage temperatures of dairy products other than raw milk shall be monitored and cooled as quickly as possible.

8. Maximum Storage Temperature
Pasteurized milk may not exceed 5ºC until it leaves the treatment establishment.



Regulation III.IV: Wrapping and Packaging

1. Hygienic Conditions
Wrapping and packaging of dairy products shall occur under satisfactory hygienic conditions in designated rooms.

2. Packaging and Storage Conditions
Packaging materials shall be stored under hygienic conditions separate from contaminants.

3. Bottling and Filling
Bottling or filling containers with heat-treated milk and milk products shall be conducted hygienically.

4. Reuse of Packaging
Packaging for dairy products may only be reused if thoroughly cleaned and disinfected.

5. Sealing
Sealing of containers shall occur immediately after filling using devices that protect milk from external influences, with clear evidence of opening upon use.



Regulation of Meat and Meat Products

Regulation A. Slaughter House

Food Business Operators which slaughter large animals, small animals (including sheep, goat, poultry birds) within their premises for meat/meat product production must adhere to the following requirements:

1. General Requirements:
   1.1 Obtain a No Objection Certificate from the local authority before obtaining a license.

2. Location of Premises:
   Establishments should be located away from vegetable, fish, or other food markets to avoid contamination. The premises should be elevated and in a sanitary location.

3. Premise Requirements:
   3.1 Must have designated areas for animal reception, lairage, slaughter hall, hide collection, paunch and offal collection, and refrigeration/cold rooms.
   3.2 Separate areas for slaughtering different species and methods (e.g., Halal, Jewish, Jhatka). Thorough cleaning required after each operation.
   3.3 Maintain separation between clean and dirty sections to ensure continuous forward movement of products without contamination.
   3.4 Provide facilities for suspected diseased animals, with isolation pens and veterinary oversight.
   3.5 Adequate lairage space based on the number of animals.
   3.6 Use hoists for carcass handling; avoid slaughtering in sight of other animals and dressing carcasses on the floor.
   3.7 Use impervious and non-slippery flooring throughout operational areas.
   3.8 Internal walls paved with impervious materials to prevent microbial growth; epoxy coating recommended.
   3.9 Construct ceilings to minimize condensation and dirt accumulation.
   3.10 Accommodation for segregation, storage, and disposal of condemned meat.
   3.11 Ensure hygienic construction and maintenance.
   3.12 Install fly-proof windows, doors with automatic closing mechanisms.
   3.13 Ensure all operations are conducted under hygienic conditions; separate living/sleeping areas.
   3.14 Install effective drainage and plumbing systems; proper refuse disposal.
   3.15 Ensure hygienic drainage of blood; use traps and screens to prevent scavenger entry.
   3.16 Separate handling areas for edible and inedible products.
   3.17 Provide separate space for hides and skins storage with dedicated exit.
   3.18 Ensure a constant supply of potable water with hot and cold water facilities.
   3.19 Provide facilities for changing clothes, cleaning footwear, and hand hygiene.
   3.20 Install latrines, toilets, and change rooms; maintain cleanliness.
   3.21 Provide facilities for sterilization of knives and equipment; use stainless steel knives only.
   3.22 Provide chimneys for open fire cooking to remove smoke and soot.
   3.23 Store pasteurized milk at temperatures not exceeding 5ºC.

Regulation B. Animal Welfare

Animal welfare practices are crucial during meat production to ensure humane treatment of animals. This includes careful handling during transportation and slaughtering to maintain meat quality and animal welfare standards.

Regulation C. Sanitary Practices

Ensure sanitation standards are met throughout the slaughterhouse:

4.1 Clean internal surfaces with hot lime wash regularly.
4.2 Maintain rooms free from steam, vapors, and odors.
4.3 Ensure regular cleaning, disinfection, and painting of floors and pavements.
4.4 Maintain cleanliness of all areas and approaches.
4.5 Provide covered receptacles for garbage and refuse disposal.
4.6 Remove slaughterhouse waste promptly and hygienically.
4.7 Avoid dragging hides and skins on the ground; restrict non-slaughter activities.
4.8 Disinfect premises before meat production; ensure dust-free environments.
4.9 Implement measures to exclude flies, rats, mice, and vermin.
4.10 Prevent access of dogs, cats, or birds to slaughter areas.
4.11 Ensure potable water supply; test water quality regularly.
4.12 Transport warm meat in clean, insulated containers to prevent contamination.

Regulation D. Equipment & Machinery

5.1 Use cleanable, corrosion-resistant equipment in slaughter halls.
5.2 Avoid metallic contamination in meat processing.

Regulation E. Personnel Hygiene

6.1 Prohibit workers with infectious diseases from working; conduct regular medical examinations.
6.2 Inoculate workers against enteric diseases.
6.3 Ensure workers maintain cleanliness with suitable workwear.



Regulation of Transportation of Animals to Slaughterhouse

1.0 General Conditions
   1.1 Only transport healthy animals certified by a veterinary inspector.
   1.2 Animals from endemic areas must undergo protective vaccination and quarantine.
   1.3 Pregnant female animals in advanced stages should not be transported.
   1.4 Special arrangements for large animals to prevent fighting and protect young ones.
   1.5 Provide humane treatment during transport; avoid binding animals; ensure adequate space.
   1.6 Accompany animals with an attendant and first aid equipment.
   1.7 Limit heavy feeding before transport; ensure watering at regular intervals.
   1.8 Separate light and heavy animals; avoid mixing different groups.
   1.9 Ensure vehicles are safe, clean, and suitable; inspect before loading.
   1.10 Disinfect vehicles thoroughly before loading animals.
   1.11 Provide appropriate flooring materials and climate-specific provisions.
   1.12 Use soft methods for driving animals; avoid hitting with sticks.
   1.13 Prefer covered transport during extreme weather conditions.
   1.14 Label consignments with necessary details.

2.0 Loading
   2.1 Avoid loading during extreme temperatures.
   2.2 Provide suitable ramps and flooring materials to prevent slipping.
   2.3 Use railway wagon doors as ramps with protective measures.

3.0 Space Requirements
   3.1 Avoid overcrowding; provide sufficient space for animals to lie down.
   3.2 Adhere to specifications for the number of animals per railway wagon.
   3.3 Limit truck speed to 40 km/h; avoid jerks and unnecessary stops.
   3.4 Prefer rail transport for journeys exceeding 12 hours.

Regulation of Slaughter:

4.0 Slaughter
   4.1 Ensure stunning before slaughter to minimize animal suffering.

Stunning:
   Mechanical and electrical stunning methods are prescribed for humane slaughter:

   - Captive bolt, mushroom head percussive, and pneumatic percussive methods for cattle.
   - Electrical stunning for sheep, goat, and poultry birds, ensuring minimal current levels.


Regulation of Transportation and Slaughter of Animals

1.0 General Conditions

1.1 Regulation: Certification of Animals  
Only healthy animals in good condition shall be transported unless they are meant for emergency slaughter. These animals should be certified by a qualified veterinary inspector for freedom from infectious diseases and ecto-parasitic diseases and their fitness to undertake the journey.

1.2 Regulation: Vaccination and Quarantine  
When animals are to be transported from endemic areas of a disease to non-endemic areas, the animals should be given protective vaccination and kept in quarantine for 30 days, before transportation.

1.3 Regulation: Transportation of Pregnant Animals  
Female animals in advanced stages of pregnancy shall not be transported.

1.4 Regulation: Arrangements for Large Animals  
When transporting large animals, particularly bears/bulls, special arrangements by providing suitable partitions should be made to protect the animals from infighting. Similar arrangements should also be made to protect the young ones from being crushed when they are transported.

1.5 Regulation: Humane Treatment  
To avoid exhaustion, the animals shall be given humane treatment and care during transportation. The animals shall not be bound or chained during transit and space provided for them shall be large enough to stand or lie.

1.6 Regulation: Accompanying Attendant  
An attendant along with first aid equipment shall accompany the animals in transit.

1.7 Regulation: Feeding Before Loading  
Before loading, the animals should not be fed heavily. Only light feed may be allowed. For journeys less than 12 hours, no feed need be carried but for longer journeys, sufficient feed shall be carried to last during the journey. Watering facilities shall be provided at regular intervals.

1.8 Regulation: Separation of Animals  
Light and heavy animals shall be separated by providing partitions; animals from different pens/sheds shall not be mixed during transportation. Male stock shall not be transported with female stock (adults).

1.9 Regulation: Vehicle Inspection  
All vehicles should be inspected for safety, suitability, and cleanliness before loading the animals. The floor and walls should be undamaged and there should be no nails or sharp projections which may injure the animals.

1.10 Regulation: Vehicle Disinfection  
The Vehicles should be thoroughly sprayed with suitable disinfectant before loading the animals.

1.11 Regulation: Flooring Requirements  
A layer of clean sand to cover the floor to a thickness of not less than 6 cm shall be provided. This layer of sand shall be moistened with water during the summer months. During hot months, arrangements shall be made to sprinkle water on the animals at frequent intervals. In winter, a 2-cm layer of clean sand with another 6-cm layer of whole-straw shall be provided.

1.12 Regulation: Animal Handling During Loading/Unloading  
Animals when driven for loading or unloading shall never be struck with a stick. Driving could best be done by a soft-rubber pipe.

1.13 Regulation: Climate Considerations  
If animals are to be transported in extreme cold or hot climates, it is preferable to transport them in covered lorries on the road so that they may not die or get exhausted or suffer from acute respiratory disease. Journeys under such adverse climates shall be minimized.

1.14 Regulation: Consignment Labeling  
Each consignment should bear a label showing the following particulars:
   - Number and kind of the animals loaded
   - Name, address, and telephone number, if any, of the consignor;
   - Name, address, and telephone number, if any, of the consignee;
   - Instructions regarding feeding and watering.

2.0 Loading

2.1 Regulation: Temperature Considerations  
Loading during extremes of temperatures shall be avoided.

2.2 Regulation: Loading Ramps  
Suitable ramp shall be provided for loading and unloading the animals. The floor of the ramp shall have cleats at intervals so that animals do not slip as they climb or descend. The ramp shall be covered with straw to avoid slipping. At any time of loading and unloading, the vehicle shall be kept clean to avoid slipping of animals.

2.3 Regulation: Railway Wagons  
In case of railway wagons, when loading is done on the platform, the door of the wagon may be used as a ramp. In such cases, bales or bags of hay, agricultural wastes, etc. may be placed on either side of the dropped door to prevent the animals from getting their legs between the sides of the wagons and platform.

3.0 Space Requirements

3.1 Regulation: Overcrowding  
Overcrowding shall be avoided. Each animal shall have enough space to lie down.

3.2 Regulation: Railway Wagon Specifications  
Railway wagons shall not accommodate more animals than those specified in IS specifications.

3.3 Regulation: Truck Speed  
The speed of the truck transporting animals shall not exceed 40 kilometers per hour, avoiding jerks and jolts. The truck shall not load any other merchandise and shall avoid unnecessary stops on the road.

3.4 Regulation: Long Journeys  
For journeys exceeding 12 hours, the animals shall be transported by railway. Loading shall be done by evening.

4.0 Slaughter

Regulation: Stunning Before Slaughter  
Animals are slaughtered by being first stunned and then exsanguinated (bled out). Stunning can be effected through asphyxiating the animals with carbon dioxide, shooting them with a gun or a captive bolt pistol, or shocking them with electric current. Stunning before slaughter should be mandatory to minimize pain and suffering.

Stunning Methods:

(i) Regulation: Mechanical Stunning  
Mechanical stunning of cattle may be carried out by one of three methods: captive bolt stunning, mushroom head percussive stunning, and pneumatic percussive stunning. For cattle, pneumatic stunning should be preferred and the optimum position is that the center of the stunner should contact the animal at a point of intersection of lines drawn from the medial corners of the eyes and the base of the ears. The best position for pigs is on the midline just above eye level, with the host directed down the line of the spinal cord. The optimum position for sheep and goat is behind the poll, aiming towards the angle of the jaw. If an animal shows signs of regaining consciousness after the initial stun, the animal must be immediately killed by the use of a captive bolt gun.

(ii) Regulation: Electrical Stunning  
Electrical Head Stunners may be preferred for sheep and goat where both electrodes are placed on the head region. Water bath electrical stunning may be used for poultry birds. A low and controlled voltage must be maintained so that the stunning will not damage the heart and brain or cause physical disability and death to the animals. 

(iii) Regulation: Gas Stunning  
Stunning of pigs by exposure to carbon dioxide (CO2) may be preferred. The concentration of CO2 should be 90% by volume but shall not be less than 80% by volume. Ideally, pigs should be exposed for 3 minutes. Sticking should be done immediately after exit from the gas chamber. Over-crowding of animals should be avoided in the gas chamber.

5.0 Precautions for Animal Welfare

General Precautions:

a. Regulation: Slaughter Area Floor  
The floor of the slaughter area should not cause slipping or falling of animals.

b. Regulation: Animal Vocalization  
Vocalization is an indicator of animal discomfort and needs to be watched for.

c. Regulation: Use of Electric Pods  
Use of electric pods for moving animals should be discouraged. Movement of animals can be managed by grouping, use of plastic-wrapped sticks, etc.

d. Regulation: Pen Stocking Density  
Pen stocking density should be monitored. All animals should have room to lie down simultaneously. The condition of animals arriving for slaughter should be closely monitored so that injured, diseased animals are not slaughtered.

e. Regulation: Noise Levels  
High-pitch sounds such as whistling and yelling should be avoided to spare distress to animals.

Critical Factors for Animal Welfare:

a. Regulation: Supervision and Training  
Supervision and training of employees.

b. Regulation: Design of Transport and Unloading  
Designing of animal transport carts and unloading bay.

c. Regulation: Construction of Holding Pens  
Proper construction of holding/resting pens, stunning box, maintenance of stunning equipment, restraining systems, gates, and other animal handling equipment.

d. Regulation: Avoiding Distractions  
Avoiding distractions that make animals refuse to move.

e. Regulation: Monitoring Animal Condition  
Monitoring the condition of animals arriving at the plant.

f. Regulation: Equipment Design  
Proper design of equipment in the slaughterhouse.

Pre-Slaughter Handling:

- Pre-slaughter handling of animals should be carefully done to reduce stress.
- Resting of the animals is essential.
- Only animals that are disease-free and in a condition to walk should be brought for slaughter.
- Distractions that impede animal movements such as reflections, air blowing towards animals, and movement or high-pitch noise need to be avoided.
- Herding of animals should not be done through electric prods but with the help of plastic bags or sticks.
- A high standard of training is required for employees to ensure that basic hygiene and safety practices are followed while handling animals.
- Equipment used for slaughter, such as captive bolt stunners, gates, hooks, etc., should be kept

 in good working condition. Cleanliness of floors needs to be ensured. There should be daily checks to ensure the smooth working of equipment and cleanliness of floors.
- The condition of the animals arriving at the plant should be monitored. Animals that are injured or not in a condition to walk should not be slaughtered.
- Inspecting personnel should pay particular attention to these points to ensure reasonable standards of animal welfare.

6.0 Poultry Welfare

Regulation: Welfare Programme  
The conditions under which broilers are housed and the way that they are managed during their growing phase, transportation, and slaughter are set down in several government/industry-endorsed Model Codes of Practice designed to safeguard their welfare.

A model welfare program needs to be developed for pick-up, transport, and broiler/chicken processing sectors. Processing units shall incorporate elements of this welfare audit in their own quality plans and manuals.

Model Program Components:

a. Regulation: Catching  
Poultry intended for the slaughter plant should be clean and in good health. Every reasonable precaution should be taken to minimize injury to poultry. The catcher needs to be trained to this effect.

b. Regulation: Transport  
For transport of poultry, crates shall be in good repair. There shall be no crate/cage damage that would allow injury to poultry or allow crates to accidentally open. Transport crates should not be overfilled, and enough space should be provided to allow all poultry to lie down.

c. Regulation: Holding  
Poultry held in storage sheds should be provided adequate ventilation and climate control such as fans or curtains.

d. Regulation: Stunning  
Stunning equipment should be properly maintained to confirm that poultry are insensible prior to slaughter, and the time between stunning and slaughter should be limited to minimize any likelihood that poultry may regain consciousness prior to slaughter.

Economic Performance and Welfare:

High standards of poultry welfare and high levels of flock performance and economic performance are not incompatible—quite the contrary, they go hand in hand. It simply makes good economic sense as well as being in the poultry's best interests to ensure that flocks are maintained in an environment in which they are thermally comfortable, protected from injury, fed optimally, and kept healthy. Therefore, all measures described elsewhere to ensure that chickens are kept in conditions that optimize their comfort (in terms of temperature, humidity, air flow, and air quality), in which they are provided with water, shelter, and a high-quality diet that matches their physiological needs, and which optimize their health have just as important an effect in terms of poultry welfare as they do on the overall efficiency of the farming operation.

Poultry Health and Welfare:

When producing chicken meat in a welfare-friendly manner, it is also important that the poultry receive prompt and appropriate medication and treatment to prevent and treat diseases if this should become necessary, and that they do not suffer any unnecessary pain, distress, fear, or physical injury. It is also important that sick or injured poultry that cannot be adequately or successfully treated are culled quickly and in a humane manner so that they do not suffer.

Regulation: Humane Slaughter (Poultry)  
While the chickens are reared specifically for human consumption and they therefore at some stage have to be slaughtered, they should be slaughtered in a humane manner, and all poultry should be stunned (rendered insensible to pain) prior to slaughter. Slaughter equipment at all supply facilities should be properly maintained to confirm that the poultry are slaughtered quickly.

7.0 Ante-Mortem Inspection

1. Regulation: Resting Before Slaughter  
All animals shall be rested before slaughter and shall be subjected to ante-mortem examination and inspection well in advance of the time of slaughter.

2. Regulation: Removal from Slaughter Hall  
No animal which has been received into a slaughter hall for the purpose of being slaughtered shall be removed from the slaughter hall before being slaughtered except with the written consent of the Qualified Veterinary Doctor. An animal which, on inspection, is found to be not fit for slaughter shall be marked as "suspect" and kept separately. Each such animal shall be marked as "suspect" only by or under the personal supervision of the Qualified Veterinary Doctor, and the marking shall not be removed or obliterated except by the Qualified Veterinary Doctor himself.

3. Regulation: Condemned Animals  
An animal showing signs of any disease at the time of ante-mortem inspection that would cause its carcass being ultimately condemned on post-mortem shall be marked as "condemned" and rejected.

4. Regulation: Suspect Animals  
An animal declared as "suspect" on ante-mortem inspection but which does not plainly show any disease or condition that would cause its entire carcass to be condemned shall maintain its identity as "suspect" until its carcass and all organs are finally inspected by the Qualified Veterinary Doctor.

5. Regulation: Febrile Condition  
No animal in a febrile condition shall be permitted for slaughter. No suspect animal shall be slaughtered until all other animals intended for slaughter on the same day have been slaughtered. All animals which, on ante-mortem inspection, show symptoms of railroad sickness, parturient paresis, rabies, tetanus, or any other communicable diseases shall be marked as "condemned" and disposed of in accordance with the provisions contained in sub-paragraph (8) below.

6. Regulation: Dying Condition  
Animals presented for slaughter and found in a dying condition on the premises of a factory due to recent disease shall be marked as "condemned" and disposed of as provided for "condemned" animals.

7. Regulation: Special Pen for Observation  
Every animal which, upon examination, is found to show symptoms of or is suspected of being diseased or animals declared as "suspect" shall at once be removed for treatment to such special pen and kept there for observation for such period as may be considered necessary to ascertain whether the animal is diseased or not.



Regulation of Transportation and Slaughter of Animals

1.0 General Conditions

1.1 Regulation: Certification of Animals  
Only healthy animals in good condition shall be transported unless they are meant for emergency slaughter. These animals should be certified by a qualified veterinary inspector for freedom from infectious diseases and ecto-parasitic diseases and their fitness to undertake the journey.

1.2 Regulation: Vaccination and Quarantine  
When animals are to be transported from endemic areas of a disease to non-endemic areas, the animals should be given protective vaccination and kept in quarantine for 30 days, before transportation.

1.3 Regulation: Transportation of Pregnant Animals  
Female animals in advanced stages of pregnancy shall not be transported.

1.4 Regulation: Arrangements for Large Animals  
When transporting large animals, particularly bears/bulls, special arrangements by providing suitable partitions should be made to protect the animals from infighting. Similar arrangements should also be made to protect the young ones from being crushed when they are transported.

1.5 Regulation: Humane Treatment  
To avoid exhaustion, the animals shall be given humane treatment and care during transportation. The animals shall not be bound or chained during transit and space provided for them shall be large enough to stand or lie.

1.6 Regulation: Accompanying Attendant  
An attendant along with first aid equipment shall accompany the animals in transit.

1.7 Regulation: Feeding Before Loading  
Before loading, the animals should not be fed heavily. Only light feed may be allowed. For journeys less than 12 hours, no feed need be carried but for longer journeys, sufficient feed shall be carried to last during the journey. Watering facilities shall be provided at regular intervals.

1.8 Regulation: Separation of Animals  
Light and heavy animals shall be separated by providing partitions; animals from different pens/sheds shall not be mixed during transportation. Male stock shall not be transported with female stock (adults).

1.9 Regulation: Vehicle Inspection  
All vehicles should be inspected for safety, suitability, and cleanliness before loading the animals. The floor and walls should be undamaged and there should be no nails or sharp projections which may injure the animals.

1.10 Regulation: Vehicle Disinfection  
The Vehicles should be thoroughly sprayed with suitable disinfectant before loading the animals.

1.11 Regulation: Flooring Requirements  
A layer of clean sand to cover the floor to a thickness of not less than 6 cm shall be provided. This layer of sand shall be moistened with water during the summer months. During hot months, arrangements shall be made to sprinkle water on the animals at frequent intervals. In winter, a 2-cm layer of clean sand with another 6-cm layer of whole-straw shall be provided.

1.12 Regulation: Animal Handling During Loading/Unloading  
Animals when driven for loading or unloading shall never be struck with a stick. Driving could best be done by a soft-rubber pipe.

1.13 Regulation: Climate Considerations  
If animals are to be transported in extreme cold or hot climates, it is preferable to transport them in covered lorries on the road so that they may not die or get exhausted or suffer from acute respiratory disease. Journeys under such adverse climates shall be minimized.

1.14 Regulation: Consignment Labeling  
Each consignment should bear a label showing the following particulars:
   - Number and kind of the animals loaded
   - Name, address, and telephone number, if any, of the consignor;
   - Name, address, and telephone number, if any, of the consignee;
   - Instructions regarding feeding and watering.

2.0 Loading

2.1 Regulation: Temperature Considerations  
Loading during extremes of temperatures shall be avoided.

2.2 Regulation: Loading Ramps  
Suitable ramp shall be provided for loading and unloading the animals. The floor of the ramp shall have cleats at intervals so that animals do not slip as they climb or descend. The ramp shall be covered with straw to avoid slipping. At any time of loading and unloading, the vehicle shall be kept clean to avoid slipping of animals.

2.3 Regulation: Railway Wagons  
In case of railway wagons, when loading is done on the platform, the door of the wagon may be used as a ramp. In such cases, bales or bags of hay, agricultural wastes, etc. may be placed on either side of the dropped door to prevent the animals from getting their legs between the sides of the wagons and platform.

3.0 Space Requirements

3.1 Regulation: Overcrowding  
Overcrowding shall be avoided. Each animal shall have enough space to lie down.

3.2 Regulation: Railway Wagon Specifications  
Railway wagons shall not accommodate more animals than those specified in IS specifications.

3.3 Regulation: Truck Speed  
The speed of the truck transporting animals shall not exceed 40 kilometers per hour, avoiding jerks and jolts. The truck shall not load any other merchandise and shall avoid unnecessary stops on the road.

3.4 Regulation: Long Journeys  
For journeys exceeding 12 hours, the animals shall be transported by railway. Loading shall be done by evening.

4.0 Slaughter

Regulation: Stunning Before Slaughter  
Animals are slaughtered by being first stunned and then exsanguinated (bled out). Stunning can be effected through asphyxiating the animals with carbon dioxide, shooting them with a gun or a captive bolt pistol, or shocking them with electric current. Stunning before slaughter should be mandatory to minimize pain and suffering.

Stunning Methods:

(i) Regulation: Mechanical Stunning  
Mechanical stunning of cattle may be carried out by one of three methods: captive bolt stunning, mushroom head percussive stunning, and pneumatic percussive stunning. For cattle, pneumatic stunning should be preferred and the optimum position is that the center of the stunner should contact the animal at a point of intersection of lines drawn from the medial corners of the eyes and the base of the ears. The best position for pigs is on the midline just above eye level, with the host directed down the line of the spinal cord. The optimum position for sheep and goat is behind the poll, aiming towards the angle of the jaw. If an animal shows signs of regaining consciousness after the initial stun, the animal must be immediately killed by the use of a captive bolt gun.

(ii) Regulation: Electrical Stunning  
Electrical Head Stunners may be preferred for sheep and goat where both electrodes are placed on the head region. Water bath electrical stunning may be used for poultry birds. A low and controlled voltage must be maintained so that the stunning will not damage the heart and brain or cause physical disability and death to the animals. 

(iii) Regulation: Gas Stunning  
Stunning of pigs by exposure to carbon dioxide (CO2) may be preferred. The concentration of CO2 should be 90% by volume but shall not be less than 80% by volume. Ideally, pigs should be exposed for 3 minutes. Sticking should be done immediately after exit from the gas chamber. Over-crowding of animals should be avoided in the gas chamber.

5.0 Precautions for Animal Welfare

General Precautions:

a. Regulation: Slaughter Area Floor  
The floor of the slaughter area should not cause slipping or falling of animals.

b. Regulation: Animal Vocalization  
Vocalization is an indicator of animal discomfort and needs to be watched for.

c. Regulation: Use of Electric Pods  
Use of electric pods for moving animals should be discouraged. Movement of animals can be managed by grouping, use of plastic-wrapped sticks, etc.

d. Regulation: Pen Stocking Density  
Pen stocking density should be monitored. All animals should have room to lie down simultaneously. The condition of animals arriving for slaughter should be closely monitored so that injured, diseased animals are not slaughtered.

e. Regulation: Noise Levels  
High-pitch sounds such as whistling and yelling should be avoided to spare distress to animals.

Critical Factors for Animal Welfare:

a. Regulation: Supervision and Training  
Supervision and training of employees.

b. Regulation: Design of Transport and Unloading  
Designing of animal transport carts and unloading bay.

c. Regulation: Construction of Holding Pens  
Proper construction of holding/resting pens, stunning box, maintenance of stunning equipment, restraining systems, gates, and other animal handling equipment.

d. Regulation: Avoiding Distractions  
Avoiding distractions that make animals refuse to move.

e. Regulation: Monitoring Animal Condition  
Monitoring the condition of animals arriving at the plant.

f. Regulation: Equipment Design  
Proper design of equipment in the slaughterhouse.

Pre-Slaughter Handling:

- Pre-slaughter handling of animals should be carefully done to reduce stress.
- Resting of the animals is essential.
- Only animals that are disease-free and in a condition to walk should be brought for slaughter.
- Distractions that impede animal movements such as reflections, air blowing towards animals, and movement or high-pitch noise need to be avoided.
- Herding of animals should not be done through electric prods but with the help of plastic bags or sticks.
- A high standard of training is required for employees to ensure that basic hygiene and safety practices are followed while handling animals.
- Equipment used for slaughter, such as captive bolt stunners, gates, hooks, etc., should be kept

 in good working condition. Cleanliness of floors needs to be ensured. There should be daily checks to ensure the smooth working of equipment and cleanliness of floors.
- The condition of the animals arriving at the plant should be monitored. Animals that are injured or not in a condition to walk should not be slaughtered.
- Inspecting personnel should pay particular attention to these points to ensure reasonable standards of animal welfare.

6.0 Poultry Welfare

Regulation: Welfare Programme  
The conditions under which broilers are housed and the way that they are managed during their growing phase, transportation, and slaughter are set down in several government/industry-endorsed Model Codes of Practice designed to safeguard their welfare.

A model welfare program needs to be developed for pick-up, transport, and broiler/chicken processing sectors. Processing units shall incorporate elements of this welfare audit in their own quality plans and manuals.

Model Program Components:

a. Regulation: Catching  
Poultry intended for the slaughter plant should be clean and in good health. Every reasonable precaution should be taken to minimize injury to poultry. The catcher needs to be trained to this effect.

b. Regulation: Transport  
For transport of poultry, crates shall be in good repair. There shall be no crate/cage damage that would allow injury to poultry or allow crates to accidentally open. Transport crates should not be overfilled, and enough space should be provided to allow all poultry to lie down.

c. Regulation: Holding  
Poultry held in storage sheds should be provided adequate ventilation and climate control such as fans or curtains.

d. Regulation: Stunning  
Stunning equipment should be properly maintained to confirm that poultry are insensible prior to slaughter, and the time between stunning and slaughter should be limited to minimize any likelihood that poultry may regain consciousness prior to slaughter.

Economic Performance and Welfare:

High standards of poultry welfare and high levels of flock performance and economic performance are not incompatible—quite the contrary, they go hand in hand. It simply makes good economic sense as well as being in the poultry's best interests to ensure that flocks are maintained in an environment in which they are thermally comfortable, protected from injury, fed optimally, and kept healthy. Therefore, all measures described elsewhere to ensure that chickens are kept in conditions that optimize their comfort (in terms of temperature, humidity, air flow, and air quality), in which they are provided with water, shelter, and a high-quality diet that matches their physiological needs, and which optimize their health have just as important an effect in terms of poultry welfare as they do on the overall efficiency of the farming operation.

Poultry Health and Welfare:

When producing chicken meat in a welfare-friendly manner, it is also important that the poultry receive prompt and appropriate medication and treatment to prevent and treat diseases if this should become necessary, and that they do not suffer any unnecessary pain, distress, fear, or physical injury. It is also important that sick or injured poultry that cannot be adequately or successfully treated are culled quickly and in a humane manner so that they do not suffer.

Regulation: Humane Slaughter (Poultry)  
While the chickens are reared specifically for human consumption and they therefore at some stage have to be slaughtered, they should be slaughtered in a humane manner, and all poultry should be stunned (rendered insensible to pain) prior to slaughter. Slaughter equipment at all supply facilities should be properly maintained to confirm that the poultry are slaughtered quickly.

7.0 Ante-Mortem Inspection

1. Regulation: Resting Before Slaughter  
All animals shall be rested before slaughter and shall be subjected to ante-mortem examination and inspection well in advance of the time of slaughter.

2. Regulation: Removal from Slaughter Hall  
No animal which has been received into a slaughter hall for the purpose of being slaughtered shall be removed from the slaughter hall before being slaughtered except with the written consent of the Qualified Veterinary Doctor. An animal which, on inspection, is found to be not fit for slaughter shall be marked as "suspect" and kept separately. Each such animal shall be marked as "suspect" only by or under the personal supervision of the Qualified Veterinary Doctor, and the marking shall not be removed or obliterated except by the Qualified Veterinary Doctor himself.

3. Regulation: Condemned Animals  
An animal showing signs of any disease at the time of ante-mortem inspection that would cause its carcass being ultimately condemned on post-mortem shall be marked as "condemned" and rejected.

4. Regulation: Suspect Animals  
An animal declared as "suspect" on ante-mortem inspection but which does not plainly show any disease or condition that would cause its entire carcass to be condemned shall maintain its identity as "suspect" until its carcass and all organs are finally inspected by the Qualified Veterinary Doctor.

5. Regulation: Febrile Condition  
No animal in a febrile condition shall be permitted for slaughter. No suspect animal shall be slaughtered until all other animals intended for slaughter on the same day have been slaughtered. All animals which, on ante-mortem inspection, show symptoms of railroad sickness, parturient paresis, rabies, tetanus, or any other communicable diseases shall be marked as "condemned" and disposed of in accordance with the provisions contained in sub-paragraph (8) below.

6. Regulation: Dying Condition  
Animals presented for slaughter and found in a dying condition on the premises of a factory due to recent disease shall be marked as "condemned" and disposed of as provided for "condemned" animals.

7. Regulation: Special Pen for Observation  
Every animal which, upon examination, is found to show symptoms of or is suspected of being diseased or animals declared as "suspect" shall at once be removed for treatment to such special pen and kept there for observation for such period as may be considered necessary to ascertain whether the animal is diseased or not.

8. Regulation: Disposal of Condemned Animals  
All animals declared as "condemned" on ante-mortem inspection shall be marked as "condemned" and killed if not already dead. Such carcasses shall not be taken into the factory to be slaughtered or dressed, nor shall they be conveyed into any department of the factory used for edible products.

8.0 Post-Mortem Inspection

1. Regulation: Detailed Post-Mortem Examination  
A careful and detailed post-mortem examination and inspection of the carcasses and parts thereof of all animals slaughtered shall be made soon after slaughter. All organs and parts of the carcasses and blood to be used in the preparation of meat food products shall be held in such a manner as to preserve their identity till the completion of the post-mortem inspection so that they can be identified in the event of the carcasses being condemned.

2. Regulation: Retained Carcasses  
Every carcass including all detached parts and organs thereof which show evidence of any condition which will render the meat or any part or organ unfit for human consumption and which for that reason may require subsequent inspection, shall be retained by the Qualified Veterinary Doctor. The identity of such carcass including the detached parts and organs thereof shall be maintained until the final inspection is completed. Retained carcasses, detached parts and organs thereof shall be maintained until the final inspection is completed. Retained carcasses, detached parts and organs thereof shall in no case be washed, trimmed or mutilated in any manner unless otherwise authorized by the Qualified Veterinary Doctor.

3. Regulation: No Air Blowing by Mouth  
No air shall be blown by mouth into the tissues of any carcass or part of a carcass.

4. Regulation: Marking of Unfit Carcasses  
Every carcass or part thereof which has been found to be unfit for human consumption shall be marked by the Qualified Veterinary Doctor as "Inspected and condemned".

5. Regulation: Custody of Condemned Carcasses  
All such condemned carcasses, parts and organs thereof shall remain in the custody of the Qualified Veterinary Doctor pending disposal at or before the close of the day on which they are marked "Inspected and condemned" in accordance with sub-paragraphs (11), (12), and (13) below.

6. Regulation: Marking of Passed Carcasses  
Carcasses, parts, and the organs thereof found to be sound, wholesome, healthful, and fit for human consumption shall be marked as "Inspected and passed".

7. Regulation: Carcasses with Anthrax  
Carcasses found affected with anthrax before evisceration shall not be eviscerated but condemned and disposed of immediately in accordance with sub-paragraph (12) below. Any part of a carcass contaminated with anthrax-infected material through contact with soiled instruments or otherwise shall be immediately condemned and disposed of as provided in sub-paragraph (12) below.

8. Regulation: Cleaning After Anthrax Contamination  
The portion of the slaughtering department including equipment, employees' boots, and aprons, etc., contaminated by contact with anthrax material shall be cleaned and thoroughly disinfected immediately.

9. Regulation: Bruised Portions  
When on inspection only a portion of a carcass on account of slight bruises is decided to be condemned, either the bruised portion shall be removed immediately and disposed of in accordance with sub-paragraph (13) below or the carcass shall be retained and kept till such time it is chilled and the bruised portion removed and disposed of as provided above.

10. Regulation: Detailed Post-Mortem Inspection  
Post-mortem inspection shall be a detailed one and shall cover all parts

 of the carcass, the viscera, lymph glands, and all organs and glands.

11. Regulation: General Rules  
The post-mortem inspection shall be in accordance with the general rules laid down for such inspection in public slaughterhouses under the control of local bodies besides special instructions that may be issued from time to time by the licensing authority.

12. Regulation: Destruction of Condemned Carcasses  
All condemned carcasses, organs or parts thereof shall be completely destroyed in the presence of the Qualified Veterinary Doctor by incineration or denatured, after being slashed freely with a knife, with crude carbolic acid, cresylic disinfectant or any other prescribed agent unless such carcasses, organs or parts thereof are sterilized for the preparation of bone-cum-meat meal before leaving the slaughterhouse premises, subject to sub-paragraph (13) below.

13. Regulation: Disposal of Anthrax-Condemned Carcasses  
Carcasses, organs, or parts thereof condemned on account of anthrax shall be disposed of either by (i) complete incineration or (ii) thorough denaturing with prescribed denaturant in the manner prescribed in the foregoing paragraphs and also in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the local authority.

14. Regulation: Supervision of Destruction  
Destruction of condemned carcasses, organs or parts thereof shall be carried out under the direct supervision of the Qualified Veterinary Doctor.

15. Regulation: Further Detailed Examination  
If in the opinion of the Qualified Veterinary Doctor a carcass, organ or part thereof is to be held back for further detailed examination, the carcass, organ, or part concerned shall not be released till the examination in detail is completed by the Qualified Veterinary Doctor and it is declared thereafter by him as fit. When it is to be detained for detailed examination, the carcass, organ, or part thereof shall be marked as "Held". If on subsequent inspection, the carcass, organ, or part thereof is found to be unwholesome and unfit for human food, the Qualified Veterinary Doctor shall mark such a carcass, organ, or part thereof as "condemned" and shall dispose of it as described in the foregoing paragraphs.

9.0 Sanitary and Hygienic Requirements for Meat Processing Units

Following Sanitary and Hygienic requirements shall be satisfied by the meat processing unit.

1. Location:

1.1 Regulation: Flooding and Contaminants  
Meat processing units should be located in areas not subjected to regular and frequent flooding and free from objectionable odours, smoke, dust, and other contaminants.

1.2 Regulation: Roadways and Areas  
Roadways and areas serving the meat processing unit which are within its boundaries or in its immediate vicinity should have a hard paved surface suitable for wheeled traffic. There should be adequate drainage and provision for cleaning.

1.3 Regulation: Access Control  
Where appropriate, meat processing units should be so designed that access can be controlled.

2. Building and Facilities:

2.1 Regulation: Working Space  
The meat processing unit should provide adequate working space for the satisfactory performance of all operations.

2.2 Regulation: Construction Soundness  
The construction should be sound and ensure adequate ventilation, good natural or artificial lighting, and easy cleaning.

2.3 Regulation: Supervision of Meat Hygiene  
The meat processing unit should be laid out and equipped so as to facilitate proper supervision of meat hygiene including performance of inspection and control.

2.4 Regulation: Pest Control  
The meat processing unit should be of such construction as to protect against the entrance and harbouring of insects, birds, rodents, or other vermin as well as the entry of environmental contaminants such as smoke, dust, etc.

2.5 Regulation: Separation of Operations  
Buildings and facilities should be designed to provide separation by partition, location, or other effective means, between those operations which may cause cross-contamination.

2.6 Regulation: Prevention of Contact  
The meat processing unit should be laid out and equipped so as to ensure that edible meat does not come into contact with floors, walls, or other fixed structures, except those which are specifically designed for contact with meat.

2.7 Regulation: Chilling and Freezing Rooms  
The construction and layout of any chilling room, freezing room, freezer store, or freezer should satisfy the requirements of these rules.

2.8 Regulation: Meat Handling Areas  
In meat handling areas:
   - Floors should be waterproof, non-absorbent, washable, non-slippery, and made of non-toxic materials, without crevices, and should be easy to clean and slope sufficiently for liquids to drain to trapped outlets.
   - Walls should be waterproof, non-absorbent, washable, and made of non-toxic materials and should be light coloured. Up to a height of at least 1.5 metres, they should be smooth and without crevices, and should be easy to clean. Space between walls and ceilings should be sealed and covered to facilitate cleaning.
   - Ceilings should be designed, constructed, and finished to prevent any accumulation of dirt and minimize condensation, mould development, and flaking, and should be easy to clean.
   - Windows and other openings should be constructed to avoid accumulation of dirt, and those which open should be fitted with insect screens. Screens should be easily movable for cleaning and kept in good repair. Internal window sills, if present, should be sloped to prevent use as shelves.
   - Doors should have smooth, non-absorbent surfaces and, where appropriate, be self-closing and close-fitting.
   - Stairs, lift cages, and auxiliary structures such as platforms, ladders, and chutes should be situated and constructed to avoid contamination of meat. They should be capable of being effectively cleaned. Chutes should be constructed with inspection and cleaning hatches.

2.9 Regulation: Construction Materials  
The use of construction materials which cannot be adequately cleaned and disinfected, such as wood, should be avoided unless its use would clearly not be a source of contamination.

2.10 Regulation: Office Accommodation  
Office accommodation should be provided for the use of the meat inspection agency.



 3. Sanitary Facilities

 3.1 Water Supply

Regulation: Potable Water Supply  
3.1.1. Supply of potable water under pressure should be available with facilities for its storage, where necessary for distribution, and with protection against contamination;

Regulation: Hot Potable Water Supply  
3.1.2. A supply of hot potable water should be available at all times during working hours;  
Note - This provision is intended to cover water for both cleaning purposes and the destruction of microorganisms (especially those pathogenic to man) on knives, utensils etc., and coming into direct contact with meat. For cleaning purposes, the temperature of the water should be 65 degrees Celsius. The hot water for disinfection purposes should be at 82 degrees Celsius and dispensed in such a way (e.g., in specially designed boxes near the working area) that blades of knives etc., can be submerged in the water for a contact time (no less than two minutes). Often, this water supply is separate from other hot water supplies used for cleaning, hand washing, etc. But if there is only one hot water supply, the term "adequate" should mean that even at times where large amounts of hot water are used (e.g., during cleaning operations), the water supply from any tap in the establishment should not be decreased;

Regulation: Ice Production  
3.1.3. Ice should be made from potable water and should be manufactured, handled, and stored so as to protect it from contamination; and

Regulation: Steam Production  
3.1.4. Steam used in contact directly with meat should be produced from potable water and contain no substances which may be hazardous to health or may contaminate the food.

 3.2 Effluent and Waste Disposal

Regulation: Effluent and Waste Disposal System  
Meat processing units should have an efficient effluent and waste disposal system. All effluent lines (including sewer systems) should be large enough to carry peak loads and should be constructed in such a manner as to avoid contamination of potable water supplies. Biological oxygen demand level shall be less than 1500, and for that, an effluent treatment plant, if necessary, may be installed.

 3.3 Facilities for Storage of Waste and Inedible Material

Regulation: Storage Facilities for Waste and Inedible Material  
Facilities should be provided for the storage of waste and inedible material prior to removal from the establishment. These facilities should be designed to prevent access to waste or inedible material by pests and to avoid contamination of food, potable water, equipment, or buildings.

 3.4 Changing Facilities and Toilets

Regulation: Changing Facilities and Toilets  
Suitable and conveniently located changing facilities and toilets should be provided in all establishments. Toilets should be so designed as to ensure the hygienic removal of waste matter. These areas should be well-lit and ventilated and should not open directly onto food handling areas. Hand washing facilities with warm or hot and cold water with suitable hygienic means of drying hands should be provided adjacent to toilets and in such a position that the employee must pass them when returning to the processing area. Where hot and cold water are available, mixing taps should be provided. Where paper towels are used, a sufficient number of dispensers and receptacles should be provided near each washing facility. Taps of non-hand operable type are preferable. Notices should be posted directing personnel to wash their hands after using the toilets.

 3.5 Hand Washing Facilities in Processing Areas

Regulation: Hand Washing Facilities  
3.5.1. Adequate and conveniently located facilities for hand washing and drying should be provided wherever the process demands. Where appropriate, facilities for hand disinfection should be provided. The facilities should be furnished with properly trapped waste pipes leading to drains.

Regulation: Cleaning and Disinfecting Implements  
3.5.2. All rooms used for deboning, preparing, packing, or other handling of meat should be equipped with adequate facilities for cleaning and disinfecting implements, conveniently located for the use of personnel during operations. These facilities are for use exclusively in the cleaning and disinfection of knives, steels, cleavers, saws, and other implements.

Regulation: Cleaning and Disinfecting Facilities  
3.5.3. All facilities for cleaning and disinfecting implements should be of such nature and size as to permit proper cleaning and disinfection of implements. These facilities should be constructed of corrosion-resistant materials and should be capable of being easily cleaned.

Regulation: Hot Water Supply  
3.5.4. All facilities for cleaning and disinfecting of implements should be fitted with suitable means of supplying hot water in sufficient quantity at all times while meat is being handled in that part of the Meat Processing Unit.

Regulation: Lighting  
3.5.5. Adequate natural or artificial lighting should be provided throughout the meat processing unit. Where appropriate, the lighting should not alter colors, and the intensity should not be less than:  
- 540 Lux (50 foot candles) at all inspection points.  
- 220 Lux (20 foot candles) in work rooms.  
- 110 Lux (10 foot candles) in other areas.  
Light bulbs and fixtures suspended over meat in any stage of production should be of a safety type and protected to prevent contamination of meat in case of breakage.

 3.6 Ventilation

Regulation: Ventilation  
Ventilation should be provided to prevent excessive heat, steam condensation, dust, and to remove contaminated air. The direction of the airflow should never be from a dirty area to a clean area. Ventilation openings should be provided with an insect screen or other protective enclosure of non-corrodible material. Screens should be easily removable for cleaning.

 4. Equipment and Utensils

 4.1 Materials

Regulation: Equipment and Utensil Materials  
All equipment, implements, and utensils used in establishments which come into contact with exposed meat and meat products should present a smooth, impervious surface and be resistant to corrosion. They should be made of material which is non-toxic, does not transmit odor or taste, is free from pits and crevices, is non-absorbent, and capable of withstanding repeated exposure to normal cleaning and disinfection. Such equipment should be so constructed that it may be easily cleaned.

 4.2 Sanitary Design, Construction, and Installation

Regulation: Sanitary Design and Construction  
4.2.1. All equipment and utensils should be so designed and constructed as to prevent hygiene hazards and permit easy and thorough cleaning and disinfection and, where practicable, be visible for inspection. Stationary equipment should be installed in such a manner as to permit easy access and thorough cleaning.

Regulation: Inedible Material Containers  
4.2.2. Containers for inedible material and waste should be leak-proof, constructed of non-corrosive metal or other suitable impervious materials which should be easy to clean or disposable and, where appropriate, able to be closed securely;

Regulation: Refrigerated Spaces  
4.2.3. All refrigerated spaces should be equipped with temperature measurement or recording devices.

 4.3 Equipment Identification

Regulation: Equipment and Utensil Identification  
Equipment and utensils used for inedible material or waste should be so identified and should not be used for edible products.

 5. Hygiene Requirements

 5.1 Maintenance

Regulation: Maintenance of Facilities  
The buildings, rooms, equipment, and all other physical facilities of the meat processing unit, including drains, should be maintained in good repair and in orderly condition. Except for rooms where meat processing or cleaning operations are performed, they should be free from steam, vapor, and surplus water.

 5.2 Cleaning and Disinfection

Regulation: Cleaning and Disinfection  
Cleaning and disinfection should meet the following requirements:  
(i) Amenities provided for the use of employees and the inspection service, including changing facilities, toilets, and the inspection office space, should be kept clean at all times.  
(ii) If rooms intended and most of the time used for the handling, preparation, processing, packaging, or storage of meat, are used for any other food preparation purposes, then cleaning and disinfection are necessary immediately before and after such use.  
(iii) The temperature in rooms for boning out and trimming should be controlled and held suitably low unless cleaning of equipment and utensils is carried out at least every four hours;  
(iv) To prevent contamination of meat, all equipment, implements, tables, utensils including knives, cleavers, knife pouches, saws, mechanical instruments, and containers should be cleaned at frequent intervals during the day and immediately cleaned and disinfected whenever they come into contact with diseased material, infective material, or otherwise become contaminated. They shall also be cleaned and disinfected at the conclusion of each working day.  
(v) If any skip, trolley, or any container used in a department where edible material is handled, enters an area where inedible material is handled, it should be cleaned and disinfected immediately before re-entering the edible department.  
(vi) Immediately after the cessation of work for the day or at such other times as may be required, the floors and walls should be cleaned to remove contamination. Floor drains should be kept in good condition and repair with strainers in place; and  
(vii) Roadways and yards in the immediate vicinity of and serving the meat processing unit should be kept clean.


 Sanitary Facilities

 Regulation 3.1: Water Supply
- Regulation 3.1.1 (Water Supply): Supply of potable water under pressure should be available with facilities for its storage, where necessary for distribution, and with protection against contamination.
- Regulation 3.1.2 (Hot Water Supply): A supply of hot potable water should be available at all times during working hours. For cleaning purposes, the temperature should be 65°C, and for disinfection purposes, it should be 82°C.
- Regulation 3.1.3 (Ice Production): Ice should be made from potable water and should be manufactured, handled, and stored to protect it from contamination.
- Regulation 3.1.4 (Steam Production): Steam used in direct contact with meat should be produced from potable water and contain no hazardous substances.

 Regulation 3.2: Effluent and Waste Disposal
- Regulation 3.2.1 (Effluent Disposal): Meat processing units should have an efficient effluent and waste disposal system with adequate capacity and construction to avoid contamination. Biological oxygen demand level shall be less than 1500.

 Regulation 3.3: Storage of Waste and Inedible Material
- Regulation 3.3.1 (Waste Storage): Facilities should be provided for the storage of waste and inedible material to prevent access by pests and contamination of food, potable water, equipment, or building.

 Regulation 3.4: Changing Facilities and Toilets
- Regulation 3.4.1 (Facilities and Toilets): Suitable and conveniently located changing facilities and toilets should be provided. Hand washing facilities with warm or hot and cold water should be adjacent to toilets.

 Regulation 3.5: Hand Washing Facilities in Processing Areas
- Regulation 3.5.1 (Hand Washing): Adequate and conveniently located facilities for hand washing and drying should be provided.
- Regulation 3.5.2 (Cleaning Implements): All rooms used for handling meat should have facilities for cleaning and disinfecting implements.
- Regulation 3.5.3 (Cleaning Facilities Design): Cleaning facilities should be constructed of corrosion-resistant materials and capable of easy cleaning.
- Regulation 3.5.4 (Hot Water Supply for Cleaning): Facilities for cleaning and disinfecting implements should have a hot water supply at all times.

 Regulation 3.6: Lighting
- Regulation 3.6.1 (Lighting Intensity): Adequate lighting should be provided, with specific lux requirements for different areas.

 Regulation 3.7: Ventilation
- Regulation 3.7.1 (Ventilation): Ventilation should prevent excessive heat, steam condensation, and dust. Ventilation openings should have insect screens or other protective enclosures.

 Equipment and Utensils

 Regulation 4.1: Materials
- Regulation 4.1.1 (Equipment Materials): Equipment, implements, and utensils should be made of non-toxic, corrosion-resistant materials and present a smooth, impervious surface.

 Regulation 4.2: Sanitary Design, Construction, and Installation
- Regulation 4.2.1 (Design and Construction): Equipment should be designed and constructed to prevent hygiene hazards and allow easy cleaning.
- Regulation 4.2.2 (Waste Containers): Containers for inedible material and waste should be leak-proof and easy to clean or disposable.
- Regulation 4.2.3 (Refrigerated Spaces): Refrigerated spaces should have temperature measurement or recording devices.

 Regulation 4.3: Equipment Identification
- Regulation 4.3.1 (Identification): Equipment and utensils for inedible material or waste should be clearly identified and not used for edible products.

 Hygiene Requirements

 Regulation 5.1: Maintenance
- Regulation 5.1.1 (Maintenance): Buildings, rooms, equipment, and all facilities should be maintained in good repair and orderly condition.

 Regulation 5.2: Cleaning and Disinfection
- Regulation 5.2.1 (Cleaning Schedule): A permanent cleaning and disinfection schedule should ensure all parts of the unit are cleaned appropriately.

 Regulation 5.3: Hygiene Control Programme
- Regulation 5.3.1 (Hygiene Control): A designated individual responsible for cleanliness should oversee a permanent cleaning and disinfection schedule.

 Regulation 5.4: Storage and Disposal of Waste
- Regulation 5.4.1 (Waste Handling): Waste should be handled to exclude contamination of food or potable water and should be removed from working areas at least daily.

 Regulation 5.5: Animal Control
- Regulation 5.5.1 (Pet Animals): Dogs, cats, or other pet animals should not be allowed to enter the meat processing unit.

 Pest Control

 Regulation 6.1: Pest Control Programme
- Regulation 6.1.1 (Pest Control): There should be an effective and continuous pest control programme.

 Regulation 6.2: Eradication Measures
- Regulation 6.2.1 (Eradication): Should pests gain entrance, eradication measures should be instituted under the supervision of knowledgeable personnel.

 Regulation 6.3: Pesticide Use
- Regulation 6.3.1 (Pesticide Employment): Pesticides should only be employed if other methods are ineffective and should be approved by the competent authority.

 Regulation 6.4: Handling and Storage of Hazardous Substances
- Regulation 6.4.1 (Hazardous Substances): Hazardous substances should be labeled and handled in a separate part of the unit to avoid contamination.

 Personnel Hygiene and Health Requirements

 Regulation 7.1: Medical Examination
- Regulation 7.1.1 (Medical Examination): Persons in contact with meat should have a medical examination prior to employment and routinely thereafter.

 Regulation 7.2: Communicable Diseases
- Regulation 7.2.1 (Disease Prevention): Management should ensure no person with a communicable disease is permitted to work in areas where meat is handled.

 Regulation 7.3: Injuries
- Regulation 7.3.1 (Injury Protocol): Injured persons should not work with meat until suitably bandaged, with first aid facilities provided.

 Regulation 7.4: Washing of Hands
- Regulation 7.4.1 (Hand Washing): Personnel should wash their hands frequently and thoroughly, especially before starting work and after handling contaminated material.

 Personnel Cleanliness

 Regulation 8.1: Personal Cleanliness
- Regulation 8.1.1 (Cleanliness): Personnel should maintain high personal cleanliness and wear suitable protective clothing.

 Regulation 8.2: Aprons
- Regulation 8.2.1 (Aprons): Aprons should not be washed on the floor or left on equipment in the working area.

 Regulation 8.3: Personal Behavior
- Regulation 8.3.1 (Behavior): Behaviors that can contaminate meat, such as eating, smoking, or chewing, should be prohibited in meat handling areas.

 Regulation 8.4: Visitors
- Regulation 8.4.1 (Visitor Hygiene): Visitors to meat handling areas should wear clean protective clothing and head covers.

 Sanitary & Hygienic Requirements for Retail Meat Shops

 Regulation 1: Location of Meat Shop
- Regulation 1.1 (Location): Meat shops should be located away from vegetable, fish, or other food markets and free from undesirable odors and contaminants.
- Regulation 1.2 (Proximity to Worship Places): Meat shops should not be less than 50 meters from places of worship and 100 meters if directly opposite the entry gate of a religious place.

 Regulation 2: Size of Meat Shops
- Regulation 2.1 (Commercial Space): The size of meat shops may vary based on business needs.
- Regulation 2.2 (Shop Height): The height of the shop should be not less than 3 meters, or 2.5 meters for air-conditioned shops.

 Regulation 3: Premises
- Regulation 3.1 (Structural Soundness): Premises should be structurally sound with walls made of impervious material up to 5 feet for easy cleaning.
- Regulation 3.2 (Floor Construction): Floors should be impervious, non-slippery, and have a slope for easy cleaning.
- Regulation 3.3 (Non-corroding Fittings): All fittings should be non-corroding.
- Regulation 3.4 (Processing Tables): Tables, racks, and shelves should have zinc, aluminum, stainless steel, or marble-granite tops.
- Regulation 3.5 (Sign Board): A sign board indicating the type of meat sold should be prominently displayed.
- Regulation 3.6 (Sewer Connection): Premises should have a sewer connection for wastewater drainage.
- Regulation 3.7 (Water Supply): Continuous supply of potable water should be available.
- Regulation 3.8 (Self-closing Doors): Doors should be of self-closing type and kept closed.

 Regulation 4: Ventilation
- Regulation 4.1 (Ventilation Requirements): Shops should have cross ventilation with at least one electric fan and one exhaust fan.
-

 Regulation 4.2 (Non-corrosive Hooks): Hanging hooks for carcasses should be non-corrosive and spaced appropriately.

 Regulation 5: Equipment and Accessories
- Regulation 5.1 (Fly Proofing): Shops should have fly proofing arrangements.
- Regulation 5.2 (Refrigeration): Shops should have a display cabinet refrigerator for maintaining specific temperatures.
- Regulation 5.3 (Weighing Scales): Scales should minimize handling and contamination, with stainless steel or nickel-coated plates.
- Regulation 5.4 (Tools and Hooks): Knives, tools, and hooks should be made of stainless steel and stored properly.
- Regulation 5.5 (Hot Water Supply): Geysers should be provided for cleaning purposes.
- Regulation 5.6 (Hand Washing Facilities): Washbasins with liquid soap dispensers should be provided.
- Regulation 5.7 (Chopping Blocks): Chopping blocks should be of food-grade synthetic material or hardwood trunk.
- Regulation 5.8 (Waste Bins): Waste bins with pedal-operated covers should be provided.

 Regulation 6: Transportation
- Regulation 6.1 (Hygienic Transportation): Carcasses should be transported in hygienic, insulated refrigerated vans, not in vehicles used for human commuting.

 Pest Control

 Regulation 7.1: Pest Control Programme
The meat shop should have an effective and continuous programme for control of insects, rodents, or other vermin within the premises. The surrounding area of the shop should also be free from insects, birds, rodents, and other vermin.

 Regulation 7.2: Record of Pest Control Measures
The pest control measures adopted by the owner of the shop should be kept as a record in the premises to be shown to any officer of the concerned Panchayats / Municipalities responsible for local administration / Corporation at the time of inspection.

 Regulation 7.3: Prohibited Pesticides
Chlorinated hydrocarbons, organophosphorus compounds, synthetic pyrethroids, rodenticides, etc., should neither be used as pesticides nor stored at the meat shop.

 Regulation 7.4: Prohibition of Live Animals and Birds
No live animals or birds should be allowed inside or adjacent to the meat shops.

 Personnel Hygiene

 Regulation 8.1: Medical Examination
Every person employed for meat handling at the meat shop shall be medically examined annually by an authorized registered medical practitioner. The examination shall include sputum and chest x-ray for tuberculosis, and stool examination for protozoal and helminthic infestations, and presence of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli, Salmonella, Shigella species, and Vibrio cholera.

 Regulation 8.2: Medical Fitness Records
A certificate/records of medical fitness of all workers handling meat should be kept as a record in the premises to be shown to any officer of the concerned Panchayats / Municipalities responsible for local administration / Corporation at the time of inspection.

 Regulation 8.3: Prohibition of Sick Workers
No worker suspected to be suffering from fever, vomiting, diarrhea, typhoid, dysentery, or boils, cuts, sores, and ulcers (however small) shall be permitted to work in the meat shops.

 Regulation 8.4: Personal Hygiene
All workers of the meat shop shall keep their fingernails short and clean and wash their hands with soap or detergent and hot water before commencement of work and after each absence, especially after using sanitary conveniences.

 Regulation 8.5: Prohibition of Certain Activities
Eating, spitting, nose cleaning, or the use of tobacco in any form or chewing betel leaves shall be prohibited within the premises of the meat shop processing, packing, and storage area. "No Smoking" and "No Spitting" boards shall be prominently displayed in the shop.

 Sanitary Practices

 Regulation 9.1: Sanitization of Chopping Block
The chopping block should be sanitized daily by covering its top with sea-salt after cleaning it with hot water at the close of business activity.

 Regulation 9.2: Floor Cleaning
The floor should be washed with appropriate disinfectant/detergent/sanitizer at the start and close of business each working day.

 Regulation 9.3: Cleanliness in Working Area
There should be a high standard of cleanliness and tidiness in the working area of the shop with no organic or other material lying on the floor.

 Regulation 9.4: Cleaning of Refrigerated Cabinet
The refrigerated/freezing cabinet should be regularly cleaned and well-maintained.

 Regulation 9.5: Prohibition of Slaughtering
Slaughtering of animals/birds inside the shop premises should be strictly prohibited.

 Regulation 9.6: Prohibition of Wet Clothes on Carcasses
The carcasses shall not be allowed to be covered with wet clothes.

 Regulation 9.7: Authorized Meat Sources
Wholesome meat obtained from the authorized slaughterhouse shall only be sold at the meat shops, and a record thereof shall be kept in the premises to be shown to any officer of the concerned Panchayats / Municipalities responsible for local administration / Corporation at the time of inspection.

 Regulation 9.8: Waste Disposal
Waste bins should be emptied and transported for disposal as per the arrangements made by the concerned Panchayats / Municipalities. The waste bin/dhalau (burial pits) shall be treated daily with a disinfectant.

 Regulation 9.9: Prohibition of Residential Use
The premises shall not be used for residential purposes, nor shall it communicate with any residential quarter. No personal belongings like clothing, bedding, shoes, etc., shall be kept in the premises. Only dressed carcasses of clean meat shall be stored at the premises.

 Regulation 9.10: Prohibition of Certain Storage Items
Hides, skins, hoofs, heads, and unclean gut will not be allowed to be stored in the premises at any time.

 Regulation 9.11: Cleaning of Chopping Instruments
The chopping instruments should be cleaned with hot water at a temperature of 82°C.

 Regulation 9.12: Prohibition of Food Preparation
The preparation of food of any type inside the meat sale outlet should be strictly prohibited.

 Regulation 9.13: Confiscation of Unauthorized Meat
Meat obtained from unauthorized sources or unstamped meat is liable to be confiscated and destroyed.

 Regulation 9.14: Waste Packaging
Waste of the meat shop should be disposed of, packed in heavy polythene bags in dhalaos (burial pits).

 Other Requirements

 Regulation 10.1: Meat Packaging
The prepared meat shall be packed in waxed paper and then placed in polyethylene bags or packed directly in bags made of food-grade plastics.

 Regulation 10.2: Legal Compliance
Failure to comply with any of these instructions may entail legal action against the defaulters, and even result in the cancellation of the license by the appropriate authority of the concerned Panchayats / Municipalities / Corporation.

 Regulation 10.3: No Objection Certificate
No Objection Certificate from a law and order point of view should be obtained from the police department or the concerned Panchayats / Municipalities / Corporation before the grant of a license for buffalo meat and pork shop.

 Regulation 10.4: Veterinary Staff for Inspection
The concerned Panchayats / Municipalities responsible for local administration shall appoint qualified veterinary staff for meat inspection (ante-mortem and post-mortem inspection). If regular staff cannot be made available, contractual arrangements shall be made for availing the services of qualified veterinary staff from the Animal Husbandry Departments of the concerned state/UT.

 Regulation 10.5: Licensing Conditions
Retail meat shop licenses shall be granted subject to fulfillment of all the above technical and administrative instructions related to the trade.

 Part V: Specific Hygienic and Sanitary Practices for Food Business Operators in Catering/Food Service Establishments

In addition to Part-II, catering/food service establishments handling, processing, manufacturing, storing, distributing, and selling food to customers, and the persons handling them, should conform to the sanitary and hygienic requirements, food safety measures, and other standards specified below. This includes premises where the public is admitted for repose or consumption of food or drink, or any place where cooked food is sold or prepared for sale. This includes:

- (a) Eating Houses
- (b) Restaurants & Hotels
- (c) Snack Bars
- (d) Canteens (Schools, Colleges, Office, Institutions)
- (e) Food Service at religious places
- (f) Neighbourhood Tiffin Services / dabba walas
- (g) Rail and airline catering
- (h) Hospital catering

 I. Good Manufacturing Practices for Whole Premise

 Food Preparation Areas

Regulation 1.1: Smoke Nuisance
There will be no smoke nuisance in the food preparation area. Where cooking or frying is done, a chimney with appropriate suction capacity as per the size of the kitchen must be installed before starting the business.

 Hand Washing Facilities and Toilets

Regulation 1.2: Wash-Hand Basins
Adequate number of wash-hand basins made of porcelain/stainless steel shall be provided along with soap to wash hands, with hot and cold running water, and materials for cleaning hands and drying them hygienically. Clean and dry towels shall be kept for customers' use.

Regulation 1.3: Separate Sinks
Separate sinks must be provided, where necessary, for washing raw food and cleaning equipment.

Regulation 1.4: Utensil Cleaning Facilities
Sinks with a draining board, detergent, and hot water shall be provided to ensure proper cleaning of utensils, crockery, and cutlery. A separate place for washing pots and pans is required.

 Changing Facilities

Regulation 1.5: Staff Changing Facilities
Facilities for staff to change their clothes, where necessary, must be provided.

 II. Good Food Hygiene Practices

 Cleaning

Regulation 2.1: Cleaning Frequency
Food areas and equipment shall be cleaned between different tasks, especially after handling raw food. Spills should be cleaned immediately.

Regulation 2.2: Cleaning Schedule
A systematic cleaning schedule and instructions must be developed by the FBO. The schedule should include:
- What needs to be cleaned
- How often it needs to be cleaned
- How the cleaning should be done

Regulation 2.3: Cleaning Instructions
Cleaning instructions should indicate:
- What cleaning products should be used
- How the products should be stored (away from raw, cooked, and packed food) and used
- How much they should be used or diluted
- How long they should be left in contact with the surface (following the manufacturer's instructions)

 Raw Materials

Regulation 2.4: Purchasing Raw Materials
Raw materials shall be purchased from reliable and known dealers and checked for visible deterioration and off-odor.

Regulation 2.5: Physical Hazards and Contamination
There should be no physical hazards and foreign body contamination.

Regulation 2.6: Storage of Raw Paste and Sauces
Raw paste, sauces, etc., should be stored in properly covered containers made of food-grade material and checked regularly for fungal growth and deterioration.

Regulation 2.7: Preparation of Fruits and Vegetables
- Fruits and vegetables protected from cross-contamination and properly conserved should be used.
- Whole fruits and vegetables should be washed in potable water before being cut or mixed with other ingredients. Uncooked, ready-to-eat fruits and vegetables should be washed with 50 ppm chlorinated water before cutting, peeling, or serving.
- Fruits and vegetables should be peeled, squeezed, and/or cut with clean equipment/utensils made of non-absorbent food-grade materials.
- Prepared fruits/vegetables should be kept in clean and properly covered food-grade containers under refrigeration or at a suitable temperature.

Regulation 2.8: Preparation of Non-Vegetarian Products
- Raw meat and processed meat should be separated from other foods and surfaces.
- Separate items (e.g., cutting boards, dishes, knives) and preparation areas should be used for raw meats, poultry, and marine products to avoid cross-contamination.
- Hands should be washed thoroughly before switching from preparing raw meat/poultry/marine products to other activities.
- Proper cooking of all non-vegetarian products is required.
- Used surfaces should be washed with an antibacterial cleaning agent, rinsed properly with water, and sanitized after preparing raw meat/poultry.
- Frozen products should be thawed as per point 9 under special requirements for high-risk foods.

 Cooking

Regulation 2.9: Cooking Processes
- The preparation/processing/cooking should be adequate to eliminate or reduce hazards to an acceptable level introduced at the raw food level.
- Methods should ensure that foods are not re-contaminated.
- Preparation/processing/cooking of veg. and non-veg. products should be segregated.
- Cooking or reheating should ensure food is hot all the way through.
- Re-use of cooking oil should be avoided.
- Food should be hot held at 60°C, cooled to 21°C within 2 hours, or cooled to 5°C in 4 hours, and then refrigerated.
- Reheated food must reach a minimum internal temperature of 74°C.
- Reheat food quickly in ovens, steamers, microwaves, or on top of the range in a steam kettle.
- Avoid reheating food on a steam table, in a bain marie, in a bun drawer, or under a heat lamp.
- In case of reheating oil, use a maximum of three times to avoid trans fat formation. Ideally, use only once.

 Chilling

Regulation 2.10: Chilling Practices
- Semi-cooked or cooked dishes and other ready-to-eat foods with a short shelf life should not be left standing at room temperature.
- Chilled food intended for consumption should be cold enough.
- Food items that need to be chilled should be put into the fridge immediately.
- Cooked food should be cooled quickly and then placed in the fridge.
- Chilled food should be processed quickly.
- Fridges and display units should be set at 5°C to ensure food is kept chilled and maintained in good working condition to avoid spoilage and contamination.

 Cross-Contamination

Regulation 2.11: Preventing Cross-Contamination
- Raw food/meat/poultry and ready-to-eat foods should be kept separate at all times.
- Hands should be washed thoroughly after touching raw meat/poultry.
- Work surfaces, chopping boards, and equipment should be cleaned before preparing food and after use.
- Separate chopping boards and knives for raw fruit/vegetables/meat/poultry and ready-to-eat food should be used.
- Raw meat/poultry should be kept below ready-to-eat food in the fridge. Separate fridges for raw meat/poultry are recommended.
- Staff should be trained to avoid cross-contamination.

 III. Personal Hygiene

Regulation 1: High Standards of Personal Hygiene
High standards of personal hygiene should be maintained by all employees handling food.

Regulation 2: Hand Washing
All employees handling food should wash their hands properly:
- Before preparing food
- After touching raw food or materials, especially meat/poultry or eggs
- After breaks
- After using the toilet
- After cleaning raw materials or utensils/equipment

Regulation 3: Footwear
Street shoes should not be worn inside the food preparation area while handling and preparing food.

Regulation 4: Food Handling and Protection
Food handlers should ensure careful food handling and protect food from environmental exposure.

Regulation 5: Handling Soiled Currency
Food handlers should not handle soiled currency notes to avoid cross-contamination.

 IV. Transportation and Handling of Food

Regulation 6: Clean Transportation Vehicles
(1) The vehicle/transportation used to carry cooked/prepared/processed food should be clean, dedicated for this purpose, and not carry anything else.

Regulation 7: Minimum Transportation Time
(2) Time required for transportation should be minimized to avoid microbial proliferation.

Regulation 8: Temperature Control for Hot Food
(3) Cooked food served hot should be kept at a temperature of at least 60°C to prevent microbial growth.

Regulation 9: Temperature Control for Cold Food
(4) Cooked food served cold should be kept below 5°C to prevent growth of pathogens.

Regulation 10: Covered Transportation
(5) All foods during transportation must be kept covered to limit pathogen growth or toxin formation, controlling time of transportation, exposure, and temperature, and using safe water for cleaning.

Regulation 11: Minimal Handling
(7) Handling of food should be minimal. Utensils, crockery, cutlery, and hands of food handlers/sellers should be clean and sanitized.

Regulation 12: Disposal of Surplus Food
(8) All surplus food and unused thawed food should be discarded.

Regulation 13: Cold Storage
(9) Food to be kept for cold storage should be distributed in small volumes to ensure uniform cooling.

Regulation 14: Storage of Dry, Fermented, and Acidified Foods
(10) Dry, fermented, and acidified foods should be stored in a cool and dry place.

Regulation 15: Proper Storage of Packaged Foods
(11) All packaged food (e.g., sterilized milk, bottled beverages, canned foods) should be stored properly during transportation to ensure seals remain intact and undamaged.

 V. Storage

Regulation 16: Proper Food Storage
(1) Foods should be cooked, stored, and kept at the right temperature.
(2) Raw meat/poultry should be stored separately from other foods.
(3) Vegetable foods should be stored above non-vegetable foods, and cooked foods above uncooked foods on separate racks in the refrigerator.

Regulation 17: Frozen Food Storage
(4) Storage temperature of frozen food should be -18°C or below.

Regulation 18: Date Labeling
(5) Cooked food to be eaten later should be cooled quickly and labeled with the preparation date to minimize wastage.

Regulation 19: Storage Instructions
(6) Storage instructions on food packaging should be followed.

Regulation 20: Storage of Dried Foods
(7) Dried foods (such as grains and pulses) should be stored off the floor, ideally in sealable containers, to allow proper cleaning and protection from pests.

Regulation 21: Stock Rotation
(8) Stock rotation should follow FIFO (first in, first out) to ensure older food is used first, preventing wastage.

 VI. Special Requirements for High Risk Foods

This section deals with specific food categories considered high risk per HACCP:
1. Cut fruits/salads, fresh juices, and beverages
2. Confectionery products
3. Meat, poultry, and fish products
4. Water-based chutneys, sauces, etc.
5. Foods transported from cooking to point of sale

 VI. Foods with Gravy

Regulation 1: Time Limit for Display or Sale
Food products should not be stored at room temperature for more than 2 hours during display or sale.

Regulation 2: Storage Conditions
For prolonged storage, foods with gravy should be either stored in refrigerators or kept for hot holding at or above 60°C.

Regulation 3: No Water Addition
No water should be added after cooking, reheating, or boiling foods with gravy.

 VII. Fried Foods

Regulation 4: Quality of Oils/Fats
(1) Good quality or branded oils/fats should be used for food preparation, frying, etc.

Regulation 5: Use of Packaged Oil
(2) Only packaged oil should be used.

Regulation 6: Avoidance of High Trans Fats
(3) Oils with high trans fats (like vanaspati) should be avoided as far as possible.

Regulation 7: Re-heating and Reuse of Oil
(4) Re-heating and reuse of oil should be avoided as far as possible. Leftover oil should not be used. However, vegetable oil having developed Total Polar Compound more than 25% shall not be used.

 VIII. Adding Ingredients after Cooking

Regulation 8: Preparation and Use of Ingredients
(1) Ingredients added to cooked food should be thoroughly washed and cleaned.

Regulation 9: Immediate Use
(2) After cooking or post-cooked mixing, the food should be used immediately.

Regulation 10: Fresh Garnishes
(3) Garnishes should be prepared using fresh, thoroughly washed, and freshly cut vegetables, and used immediately.

 IX. Reuse of Cooked Food

Regulation 11: Recommendations for Reuse
Reuse of cooked food is not recommended for potentially hazardous foods and high-risk foods. Foods such as hollandaise sauce, refried beans, scrambled eggs, and cut fruits should be discarded after initial serving.

Regulation 12: Banquet Settings
All food at banquet settings that has been on display should be discarded after initial serving.

Regulation 13: Temperature for Reuse
Food kept at more than 60°C during service may be reused only if reheated to a temperature of more than 74°C. Leftover food should never be mixed with fresh product.

 X. Thawing of Frozen Products

Regulation 14: Thawing Methods
(1) Thawing in Refrigerator:
- Items being thawed should be labeled with the defrost date.
- Thaw food at 5°C or less.
- Temperature-controlled thawing is recommended for meat, poultry, and fish.

Regulation 15: Thawing in Running Water
- Items being thawed should be labeled with date and time.
- Thawing in running water is advisable for shellfish and seafood, not exceeding 90 minutes.
- Ensure an air break between the tap and water.
- Use sanitized food-grade containers.
- Sink must not be used for other purposes during thawing.
- After thawing, the product must be used within 12 hours.
- Cold running water (from mains) should be at 15°C or less.

