_tableStart_
SI. No.,Edible Vegetable Oil,Claims
1,Coconut Oil," Contains medium chain fatty acids that are easily
metabolized."
2,Corn Oil," Rich in Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6
PUFA, linoleic acid);
 Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to maintain
normal blood cholesterol levels."
3,Cottonseed Oil,Rich inOmega-6PolyUnsaturatedFattyAcid(Omega-6
,,"PUFA, linoleic acid);"
,,Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to maintain
,,normal blood cholesterol levels;
,,Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidant.
4,Groundnut Oil,ContainsMonoUnsaturatedFattyAcid(MUFA)and
,,Omega-6Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6 PUFA) that
,,helps lowering ofcholesterol;
,,Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidant.
5,Linseed/Flax Seed Oil,Richin Omega-3PolyUnsaturatedFattyAcid(Omega-3
,,"PUFA, Alpha linolenic acid);"
,,Alpha linolenic acid is an essential fatty acid thatcontributes
,,to the maintenance of normal blood cholesterol levels.
,,Rich in Mono Unsaturated Fatty Acid (MUFA) that helps to
,,maintain blood cholesterol levels;
6,"Mustard/Rapeseed Oil (Low
Erucic)",ContainsOmega-3PolyUnsaturatedFattyAcid(Omega-3
,,"PUFA,Alpha linolenic acid);"
,,Alpha linolenic acid is an essential fatty acid thatcontributes
,,to the maintenance of normal blood cholesterol levels.
7,Mustard Oil,ContainsOmega-3PolyUnsaturatedFattyAcid(Omega-3
,,PUFA)
,,Alpha linolenic acid is an essential fatty acid thatcontributes
,,to the maintenance of normal blood cholesterol levels
,,Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidant.
8,Olive Oil/Olive Pomace,Rich in Mono Unsaturated Fatty Acid (MUFA) that helps to
,Oil/Extra virgin Olive oil,maintain blood cholesterol levels;
,,Contains polyphenols which are natural antioxidant.
9,Safflower Oil,Rich inOmega-6PolyUnsaturatedFattyAcid(Omega-6
,,"PUFA, linoleic acid)"
,,Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to maintain
,,normal blood cholesterol levels.
10,Palm Kernel Oil,Containsmediumchainfattyacidsthatareeasily
,,metabolized.
11,Palmolein Oil,ContainsTocopherolsandTocotrienolswhicharenatural
,,antioxidant
,,Contains MUFA and Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid
,,(Omega-6 PUFA)that helps lowering of cholesterol
,,"Contains Oryzanol,Tocopherols and Tocotrienols which are"
,,natural antioxidants
12,Rice Bran Oil,Oryznolhasantioxidantpropertyandreduceshighblood
,,cholesterol
13,Sesame Oil," Contains equal proportions of MUFA (oleic acid) and
Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6 PUFA,
Linoleic acid) that helps lowering of cholesterol
 Contains lignans which are natural antioxidants.
 Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidant"
14,Soybean Oil," Contains Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6
PUFA, linoleic acid) and Omega-3 Poly Unsaturated Fatty
Acid (Omega-3 PUFA, alpha linolenic acid) in appropriate
proportions suggested by RDA guidelines of ICMR
 Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to maintain
normal blood cholesterol levels
 Alpha linolenic acid is an essential fatty acid that contributes
to the maintenance of normal blood cholesterol levels
 Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidant"
15,Sunflower Oil," Rich in Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6
PUFA,linoleic acid)
 Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to maintain
normal blood cholesterol levels
 Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidant.‖."
_tableEnd_


_tableStart_
SI. No.,Edible Vegetable Oil,Claims
1,"Coconut Oil/Virgin Coconut
Oil","(i) Contains medium chain fatty acids that are easily
metabolized."
2,Corn Oil,"(i) Rich in Omega-6 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid
(Omega-6 PUFA, linoleic acid);
(ii) Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to
maintain normal blood cholesterol levels."
3,Cottonseed Oil,"(i) Rich in Omega-6 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6 PUFA, linoleic acid);
(ii) Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to
maintain normal blood cholesterol levels;
(iii) Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidants."
4,Groundnut Oil,"(i) Contains Monounsaturated Fatty Acids (MUFA) and
Omega-6 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6
PUFA) that helps lowering of cholesterol;
(ii) Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidants."
5,Linseed/Flax Seed Oil,"(i) Rich in Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid
(Omega-3 PUFA, Alpha linolenic acid);
(ii) Alpha linolenic acid is an essential fatty acid that
contributes to the maintenance of normal blood
cholesterol levels."
6,"Mustard/Rapeseed Oil (Low
Erucic)","(i) Rich in Monounsaturated Fatty Acids (MUFA) that
helps to maintain blood cholesterol levels;
(ii) Contains Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid
(Omega-3 PUFA, Alpha linolenic acid);
(iii) Alpha linolenic acid is an essential fatty acid that
contributes to the maintenance of normal blood
cholesterol levels."
7,Mustard Oil,"(i) Contains Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid
(Omega-3 PUFA) ;
(ii) Alpha linolenic acid is an essential fatty acid that
contributes to the maintenance of normal blood
cholesterol levels ;
(iii) Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidants."
8,"Olive Oil/Olive Pomace
Oil/Extra virgin Olive oil","(i) Rich in Monounsaturated Fatty Acids (MUFA) that
helps to maintain blood cholesterol levels;
(ii) Contains polyphenols which are natural antioxidants."
9,Safflower Oil,"(i) Rich in Omega-6 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid
(Omega-6 PUFA, linoleic acid);
(ii) Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to
maintain normal blood cholesterol levels."
10,Palm Kernel Oil,"(i) Contains medium chain fatty acids that are easily
metabolized."
11,Palmolein Oil,"(i) Contains Tocopherols and Tocotrienols which are
natural antioxidants"
12,Rice Bran Oil,"(i) Contains MUFA and Omega-6 Poly Unsaturated Fatty
Acid (Omega-6 PUFA) that helps lowering of
cholesterol ;
(ii) Contains Oryzanol, Tocopherols and Tocotrienols
which are natural antioxidants ;
(iii) Oryznol has antioxidant property and reduces high
blood cholesterol."
13,Sesame Oil,"(i) Contains equal proportions of MUFA (oleic acid) and
Omega-6 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-6
PUFA, Linoleic acid) that helps lowering of
cholesterol ;
(ii) Contains lignans which are natural antioxidants;
(iii) Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidants."
14,Soybean Oil,"(i) Contains Omega-6 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid
(Omega-6 PUFA, linoleic acid) and Omega-3 Poly
Unsaturated Fatty Acid (Omega-3 PUFA, alpha
linolenic acid) in appropriate proportions suggested
by Recommended Dietary Allowance guidelines of
Indian Council of Medical Research ;
(ii) Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to
maintain normal blood cholesterol levels ;
(iii) linolenic is acid an fatty acid that essential Alpha
to maintenance the normal blood of contributes
cholesterol levels ;
(iv) Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidant ."
15,Sunflower Oil,"(i) Rich in Omega-6 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids
(Omega-6 PUFA,linoleic acid) ;
(ii) Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid that helps to
maintain normal blood cholesterol levels ;
(iii) Contains Tocopherols."
16,Chia Oil,"(i) Rich in Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid
(Omega-3 PUFA, Alpha linolenic acid);
(ii) linolenic is acid an fatty acid that essential Alpha
to maintenance the normal blood of contributes
cholesterol levels."
17,Avocado Oil,"(i) Rich in Monounsaturated Fatty Acids (MUFA) that
helps to maintain normal blood cholesterol levels."
18,"Sunflower seed Oil-High
Oleic Acid","(i) Rich in Monounsaturated Fatty Acids (MUFA) that
helps to maintain normal blood cholesterol levels;
(ii) Contains Tocopherols which are natural antioxidants."
19,"Safflowerseed Oil-High
Oleic Acid","(i) Rich in Monounsaturated Fatty Acids (MUFA) that
helps to maintain normal blood cholesterol levels. ”"
_tableEnd_

_tableStart_
Sl. No,Nutrient or component,Claim,Conditions
1,"Energy or
Calorie",Low,"Not more than
40 kcal per 100 g for solids, or
20 kcal per 100 ml for liquids."
,,Free,"Not more than
4 kcal per 100 ml for liquids."
2,Fat,Low,"Not more than
3 g of fat per 100 g for solids, or
1.5 g of fat per 100 ml for liquids."
,,Free,"Not more than
0.5 g of fat per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids."
3,Cholesterol,Low,"Not more than
20 mg cholesterol per 100 g for solids and 1.5 g saturated fat per 100 g for
solids, or
10 mg per 100 ml for liquids and 0.75 g of saturated fat per 100 ml for liquids
and in either case must provide not more than 10% of energy from saturated fat."
,,Free,"Not more than
5 mg cholesterol per 100 g for solids, or 100 ml for liquids.
Additionally, the food shall contain no more than
1.5 g saturated fat per 100 g for solids, or
0.75 g of saturated fat per 100 ml for liquids
and in either case must provide not more than 10% of energy from saturated fat."
4,Saturated fat,Low,"Not more than
1.5g per 100 g for solids, or
0.75 g per 100 ml for liquids
and in either case must provide not more than 10% of energy from saturated fat."
,,Free,"Saturated fatty acids do not exceed
0.1 g per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids."
5,Unsaturated fat,High,"At least 70 per cent. of the fatty acids present in the product are derived from
unsaturated fat under the condition that unsaturated fat provides more than 20
per cent. of energy of the product"
6,Trans fat,Free,"The food contains less than 0.2 g trans fat per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for
liquids.
Provided that for edible oils/fats: 1 g per 100 g or 100 ml of edible oils or fats"
7,"Monounsaturated
Fatty Acids",High,"Shall only be made where at least
45 per cent. of the total fatty acids present in the product are derived from
monounsaturated fat and under the condition that monounsaturated fat provides
more than 20 per cent. of energy of the product"
8,"Polyunsaturated Fatty
Acids",High,"Shall only be made where at least
45 per cent. of the total fatty acids present in the product are derived from
polyunsaturated fat under the condition that polyunsaturated fat provides and
more than 20 per cent. of energy of the product"
9,Omega 3 fatty acids,Source,"The product contains -at least 0.3 g alpha-linolenic acid per 100 g or per 100 kcal, or
at least 40 mg of the sum of eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid
per 100 g or per 100 kcal"
,,High,"The product contains:
at least 0.6 g alpha-linolenic acid per 100 g or per 100 kcal, or
at least 80 mg of the sum of eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid
per 100 g or per 100 kcal"
10,Sugars,Low,"The product contains not more than -5 g of sugars per 100 g for solids, or
2.5 g of sugars per 100 ml for liquids."
,,Free,"The product contains not more than
0.5 g of sugars per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids."
11,Protein,Source,"10 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per 100 g for solids
5 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per 100 ml for liquids, or
5 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per 100 kcal, or
10 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per serving"
,,"Rich /
High","20 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per 100 g for solids
10 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per 100 ml for liquids, or
10 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per 100 kcal, or
20 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per serving"
12,"Vitamin(s)
or Mineral(s)",Source,"The food provides at least -15 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance of the vitamin or mineral per
100 g for solids; or
7.5 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance of the vitamin or mineral per
100 ml for liquids; or
5 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per 100 kcal; or
15 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per serving"
,,High,"The food provides at least -30 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per 100 g for solids; or
15 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per 100 ml for liquids; or
10 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per 100 kcal; or
30 per cent. of Recommended Dietary Allowance per serving"
13,Sodium,Low,"Product contains not more than
0.12 g of sodium per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids."
,,Very low,"Product contains not more than
0.04 g of sodium per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids."
,,Sodium,Product contains not more than
,,free,0.005 g of sodium per 100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids.
14,Dietary fibre,Source,"Product contains at least -3 g of fibre per 100 g for solids; or
1.5 g of fibre per 100 ml for liquids; or
1.5 g of fibre per 100 kcal."
15,Probiotics,,Source,"Product contains ≥10^{8} Colony Forming Unit in the recommended serving size
per day"
16,Glycemic,index,Low GI,GI value below 55
,(GI)*,,,"A food’s GI indicates the rate at which the carbohydrate in the food is broken
down into glucose and absorbed from the gut into the blood"
17,"Docosahexaenoic
acid (DHA)",,Source,Product contains at least 40 mg of DHA per 100 g or per 100 kcal.
18,Lactose,,Free,Lactose content in the product shall not exceed 0.1 per cent.
19,Gluten,,Free,Gluten content in the product shall not exceed 20 mg/kg.
_tableEnd_


_tableStart_
SI. No. (1),Nutrient or Food-Health,Conditions for claim,Claim Statement
1,VitaminCalcium andCalcium or,(i)The food is a source or high in,"Adequate calcium (or calcium
and vitamin D) intake
throughout life, through a
balanced diet are essential for
bone health and to reduce the
risk of osteoporosis"
,D and osteoporosis,calcium or in calcium and vitamin,
,,D; and,
,,(ii)a statement that the beneficial,
,,effect is obtained with a daily,
,,recommended intake (RDA),
2,Sodium and Hypertension,A foodwhich -,"Diets low in sodium may help in
reducing the risk of high blood
pressure."
,,(i)is low in sodium (0.12 g,
,,sodium/100 g or 100 ml); and,
,,(ii)a statement that the beneficial,
,,effect is obtained with a low,
,,sodium diet.,
3,bloodandfatsaturatedDietary,(i)low saturated fat; and,Dietslowinsaturatedfat
,cholesterol,(ii)a statement that the beneficial,contributestoreductionof
,,effect is obtained with a diet low,blood cholesterol levels.
,,"in fat, saturated fat and physical",
,,activity,
4,high bloodPotassium and risk of,The food is a good source,"Diets containing good sources
of potassium and low in sodium,
fat and saturated fat may help
reduce the risk of high blood
pressure."
,pressure,of potassium and is -,
,,(i)low in sodium; and,
,,(ii)low in total fat and saturated fat.,
5,andacid(ALA)linolenic–Alpha,(i)The food contains at least 1 g of,Alpha–linolenicacid(ALA)
,cholesterol levelblood,omega-3 fatty acids per 100 g or,contributesto themaintenance
,,100 ml or 100 kcal; and,
,,(ii)a statement that the beneficial,ofnormalbloodcholesterol
,,effect is obtained with daily,levels.
,,intake of 2 g of ALA,
6,bloodandFibreDietarySoluble,(i)Soluble dietary fibre from food,Solubledietaryfibretakenas
,cholesterol,sources including but not,part ofadietcontributesto
,,"limited to oats, barley, millets or",reductionofbloodcholesterol
,,mixtures thereof;,
,,(ii)contains at least 1 g per serving;,levels.
,,and,
,,(iii)statement that the beneficial,
,,effect is obtained with daily,
,,intake of 3 g of soluble dietary,
,,fibre.,
7,Phytosterol or stanol,Food with phytosterol or stanol -,"Foods containing plant sterols
or stanols (as applicable)
containing at least 1g of plant
sterols or stanols eaten twice a
day with meals for a daily
intake of up to 3 g contributes to
reduction of blood cholesterol
levels."
,and blood cholesterol,,
,,(i)contains at least 1 g plant sterols,
,,or stanols per serving; and,
,,(ii)a statement that the beneficial,
,,effect is obtained with a daily,
,,intake of up to 3 g per day.,
8,"andbarley)(oats,Beta-glucans",(i)The food is oats or barley;,Beta-glucansfromoatsor
,blood glucose,(ii)contains at least 4 g beta-,barleywhentakenaspartofa
,,glucans for each 30 g of,
,,(iii)available carbohydrates in the quantified portion; and a statement that it is taken as part of the meal,meal may help in reduction of rise in blood glucose after that meal.
-_tableEnd_