FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 4th December, 2020
F. No. Stds/03/Notification (IFR)/ FSSAI-2017.—Whereas the draft of the Food Safety and
Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 2019 were published as required by section 92 of the
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006), vide notification of the Food Safety and Standards
Authority of India number F. No. Stds/03/Notification (IFR)/ FSSAI-2017, dated the 1st May, 2019, in the
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, inviting objections and suggestions from the persons
likely to be affected thereby, before the expiry of the period of thirty days from the date on which the
copies of the Official Gazette containing the said notification were made available to the public;
And whereas, the copies of the said Gazette were made available to the public on the 14th May,
2019;
And whereas the objections and suggestions received from the public in respect of the said draft
regulations have been considered by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (e) of sub- section (2) of section 92
of the said Act and in supersession of the sub-regulation 2.1.19 of regulation 2.0 of Food Safety and
Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011, except as respects things done
or omitted to be done before such supersession, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India hereby
makes the following regulations, namely: -
Chapter 1
Preliminary
1. Short title and commencement: (1) These regulations may be called the Food Safety and Standards
(Foods for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 2020.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette and Food Business
Operator shall comply with all the provisions of these regulations by 1st July, 2021.
2 Definitions, - (1) In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a) “Act” means the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006);
(b) “Food Authority” means the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India established under section
4 of the Act;
(c) “Food for infants based on traditional food ingredients” are products known to be prepared
traditionally at home for feeding infants, but processed and provided in packaged forms, after six
months up to twenty-four months of age;
(d) “Food for special medical purpose intended for infants” means a substitute for human milk or
formula that is specially manufactured to meet the special nutritional requirements of infants from birth
to twenty-four months with specific disorders, diseases or medical conditions;
(e) “Follow-up formula” means a food for infants after six months up to twenty four months of age,
which is intended for use as a liquid part of the complementary diet for infants when prepared in
accordance with instructions for use;
(f) “Infant Food” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (x) of sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the
Act;
(g) “Infant Milk substitute” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (x) of sub-section (1) of
Section 3 of the Act;
(h) “Infant formula” means a breast milk substitute product based on milk of cow or buffalo or other
milch animals as specified under the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food
Additives) Regulations, 2011 or mixture thereof and other ingredients which have been proven to be
suitable for infant feeding, to meet the nutritional requirements of infant during the first six months;
(i) “Milk cereal based complementary food” means the food for infants after 6 months up to 24 months
of age, which is based on milk, cereals and /or legumes (pulses), millets, nuts and protein concentrates
or protein isolates and/or defatted edible oilseed extracts and so prepared as to permit dilution with
water or milk or other suitable medium;
(j) “Processed cereal based complementary food” means food for infants after 6 months up to 24 months
of age, which is based on cereals and legumes (pulses), millets, nuts and protein isolates or protein
concentrates or de-fatted edible oil seed extracts and so prepared as to permit dilution with water or
milk or other suitable medium;
(k) “Schedules” means the Schedules to these regulations.
(2) Words and expression used herein and not defined in these regulations shall have the same meaning as
assigned to them in the Act.
3. General requirements-
(1) An article of infant milk substitutes or infant foods or food for special medical purpose intended for
infants, whose standards are not specified under these regulations shall be manufactured for sale,
exhibited for sale or stored for sale only after obtaining approval of such article of food and its label
from the Food Authority.
(2) Foods for infant nutrition shall be packed in hermetically sealed, clean and sound containers or in
flexible pack made from paper, polymer and/ or metallic film as per the Food Safety and Standards
(Packaging) Regulations, 2018, so as to protect the contents from deterioration. It shall be packed
under inert atmosphere. The packaging material used for products covered under these regulations
shall be free from Bisphenol A (BPA).
(3) A variation of minus 10.0 per cent from the declared value of the nutrients or nutritional ingredients
on the label shall be allowed. The nutrient levels shall not exceed maximum limits as specified in the
composition tables.
(4) Wherever applicable, food for infant nutrition shall use the source compounds for minerals, vitamins
and other nutrients from Schedule-I(a), Schedule-I(b) and Schedule-I(c), respectively provided under
these regulations.
(5) Foods for infant nutrition may contain algal and fungal oil as sources of Docosahexaenoic Acid
(DHA) and Arachidonic acid (ARA) from Crypthecodiniumcohnii, Mortierellaalpina, Schizochytrium
sp., and Ulkenia sp. or fish oil at the level of maximum 0.5 per cent. DHA of total fatty acids and ratio
of ARA:DHA as 1:1 minimum.
Provided that DHA content shall not be less than 0.2 per cent of total fatty acids, if a claim related to
the addition of DHA is made.
Provided further that Infant Milk substitutes for preterm infants shall comply with requirements
specified under the standards.
(6) Lactose and glucose polymers shall be the preferred carbohydrates for food for infant nutrition.
Sucrose and/or fructose shall not be added, unless needed as a carbohydrate source, and provided the
sum of these does not exceed 20 per cent of total carbohydrate.
(7) Food for infant nutrition shall be free from lumps and coarse particles, and shall be uniform in
appearance. It shall be free from rancid taste and musty odour.
Provided that milk cereal based complementary food and processed cereal based complementary food
may be in the form of small granules and flakes forms.
(8) Food for infant nutrition shall comply with the requirements of the Infant Milk Substitutes, Feeding
Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1992(42 of 1992) as
amended in 2003 including aspect related to advertisement, marketing and promotion of Food products
covered under these regulations in accordance with the section 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the said Act.
(9) Food for infant nutrition shall comply with the requirements of the Legal Metrology (Packaged
Commodities) Rules, 2011 except for the requirement of standard pack size as per the second schedule
of the aforesaid rules in case of food for special medical purpose intended for infants.
(10) Food for infant nutrition shall conform to the Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins and
Residues) Regulations, 2011.
(11) Food for infant nutrition shall conform to the Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restriction
of Sales) Regulation, 2011.
(12) Food for infant nutrition shall conform to the microbiological requirements specified under Appendix
B of Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011.
(13) Advertisements and claims of products covered under these regulations shall be in accordance with the
Food Safety and standards (Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018.
(14) Wherever nutritional composition has been specified in 100 gm or 100 kcal basis under specific
product categories in the composition tables, the FBO’s shall comply with the nutrition composition in
either per 100 gm or per 100 kcal basis.
4. Labelling: The labelling of the food for infant nutrition shall be in accordance with the Food Safety and
Standards (Packaging and Labelling) Regulations, 2011, and the specific labelling requirements provided
under these regulations.
 (1) Without prejudice to any other provisions relating to labelling requirements contained in these
regulations, every container of products covered under these regulations or any label affixed thereto
shall indicate in a clear, conspicuous and in an easily readable manner, the words “IMPORTANT
NOTICE” in capital letters and indicating thereunder the following particulars, namely: -
(a) a statement “MOTHER’S MILK IS BEST FOR YOUR BABY” in capital letters. The types of
letters used shall not be less than five millimetres and the text of such statement shall be in the front
of the pack of every container of food for infant nutrition or any label affixed thereto. The colour of
the text printed or used shall be different from that of the background of the label, container as the
case maybe. In case of infant food, a statement indicating “Infant food shall be introduced only
after the age of six months and up to the age of two years” shall also be given.
Provided that in case of food for special medical purpose intended for infants where breastfeeding is
contraindicated on medical grounds for the disease(s), disorders(s) or medical condition(s) for which
the product is intended, the labelling provision “MOTHERS’ MILK IS BEST FOR YOUR BABY”
shall not be required.
(b) a statement that infant milk substitute or infant food shall be used only on the advice of a health
worker as to the need for its use and the proper method of its use;
(c) a warning that Infant milk substitute or infant food is not the sole source of nourishment of an infant;
(d) a statement indicating instruction for appropriate and hygienic preparation including cleaning of
utensils, bottles and teats and warning against health hazards of inappropriate preparations, as
under;
Warning/Caution-Careful and hygienic preparation of infant foods or infant milk substitute is most
essential for health. Do not use fewer scoops than directed since diluted feeding will not provide
adequate nutrients needed by your infant. Do not use more scoops than directed since concentrated
feed will not provide the water needed by your infant.
(e) the approximate composition of nutrients per 100 gm or 100 ml of the product including its energy
value in kilo calories or kilo joules;
(f) the storage condition specifically stating “Store in a cool and dry place in an air tight container” or
the like (after opening use the contents within the period mentioned or the expiry date whichever is
earlier);
(g) the feeding chart and directions for use and instruction for discarding leftover feed;
(h) instruction for use of measuring scoop (level or heaped) and the quantity per scoop (scoop to be
given with pack);
(i) indicating the Batch number, Month and Year of its manufacture, Use by date or Recommended
Last Consumption date or Expiry Date;
(j) the protein efficiency ratio (PER) which shall be minimum 2.5, if the product other than infant milk
substitute is claimed to have higher quality protein;
(k) the specific name of the food additives and appropriate class titles, if permitted, shall also be
declared;
(2) No containers or label of food for infant nutrition shall have a picture of infant or women or both. It
shall not have picture or other graphic materials or phrases designed to increase the saleability or the
infant milk substitute or infant food. The terms “Humanised” or “Maternalised” or any other similar
words shall not be used. The package and/or any other label of infant milk substitute or infant food
shall not exhibit the words, “Full Protein Food”, “Energy Food”, “Completer Food” or “Health
Food” or any other similar expression.
(3) The product which contains neither milk nor any milk derivatives shall be labelled “Contains no
milk or milk products or milk derivatives” in conspicuous manner.
(4) Declaration to be surrounded by line: There shall be a surrounding line enclosing the declaration
where the words “unsuitable for babies” are required to be used. The distance between any part of
the word “unsuitable for babies” surrounding the line enclosing these words shall not be less than
1.5 mm.
(5) A warning relating to allergen if any ingredients with known allergenicity are present;
(6) A warning against inherent contamination as under:
“Warning: Boiled and cooled water shall be used to prepare this product and any leftover product
must be discarded to reduce the risk of infection”.
5. Food Additives:
(1) Food for infant nutrition shall be free from preservatives, added colours and flavours.
(2) Only the food additives listed under these regulations shall be used in the foods covered under these
regulations. The articles of food may contain carry over food additives subject to compliance with
the provisions specified under 3.1.1 (10) of Food Safety and standards (Food products Standards and
Food Additives) Regulations, 2011.
6. Hygiene: The product covered under these regulations shall be prepared and handled in accordance with
the requirement specified in Schedule-IV of the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of
Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011 and Code of Hygienic Practice for Powdered Formulae for Infants
and Young Children (CAC/RCP 66-2008) specified by Codex Alimentarius Commission.
Chapter 2
Infant Milk Substitute
7. Infant formula: This standard applies to infant formula in liquid or powdered form intended for use,
where necessary, as a substitute for human milk in meeting the normal nutritional requirements of infants
during the first six months.
(1) Composition:
(a) Infant formula is a product based on milk of cow or buffalo or other milch animals as defined under
the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011 or
mixture thereof, and other nutrients and ingredients which have been provided under these
regulations.
(b) The product may be modified by partial removal or substitution of different milk solids and
addition of carbohydrates; and salts such as phosphates and citrates. Only precooked and / or
gelatinised starches gluten-free by nature may be added to infant formula up to 30 per cent of total
carbohydrates and up to 2 gm/100ml.
(c) The infant formula may contain vegetable oils rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids to partially
substitute milk fat. It may contain medium chain triglycerides. Hydrogenated vegetable oils and
fats shall not be used in infant formula.
(d) The infant formula may contain fructo-oligosaccharides and/or galacto-oligosaccharides. In either
case, their content shall not exceed 0.8 gm/100ml. When used in combination the percentage ratio
shall be 90:10 of galacto-oligosaccharides and fructo-oligosaccharides, respectively
(e) Infant formula may contain L(+) lactic acid producing bacteria with prior approval of the Food
Authority.
(f) Infant formula ready for consumption in accordance with instructions of the manufacturer shall
contain not less than 60 kcal and not more than 70kcal of energy per 100 ml.
(g) The infant formula shall also conform to the following requirements, namely:-