Regulation Name: FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (LABELLING AND DISPLAY) REGULATIONS, 2020
Scope: These regulations prescribe the labelling requirements of pre-packaged foods and display of essential information on premises where food is manufactured, processed, served, and stored.
Commencement: These regulations came into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette, and Food Business Operators were required to comply with all provisions after one year from the date of publication, except for chapter-3, which required compliance by 1st January, 2022.
Regulation Keywords:
Labeling Requirements
Display of Information
Compliance Date Extension: Compliance was effective from 1st July, 2022, as per Direction F.No.REG/L&D-Extension/FSSAI-2021 dated 22nd October, 2021.
Definitions:

Act: Refers to the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (Act 34 of 2006).
Assorted Pack: Refers to any package or container containing multiple units of different food products intended and displayed for retail sale.
Best Before Date: Refers to the date signifying the end of the period during which the food product shall remain fully marketable and shall retain any specific qualities for which tacit or express claims have been made.
Children or Child: Refers to a person under the age of 18 years as defined in the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015.
Date of Manufacture: Refers to the date on which the food products become the product as described.
Date of Packaging: Refers to the date on which the food product is placed in the immediate container in which it will be ultimately sold.
E-commerce: Refers to buying and selling of goods and services over digital and electronic networks.
Foods for Catering Purposes: Refers to those foods for use in various institutions where food is offered for immediate consumption.
Front of Pack: Refers to the part of the package that faces forward and is typically the first thing a consumer will see when they look at the product.
Infant: Refers to a person not more than twelve months of age.
Labelling: Refers to any written, printed, or graphic matter that is present on the label, accompanies the food, or is displayed near the food.
Lot Number: Refers to the identification mark shown on the label by the use of numeral or alphabet or combinations thereof.
Multi-unit Package: Refers to a package containing two or more individually packaged or labeled units of the same food commodity.
Non-retail Containers: Refers to any container that is not intended to be offered for direct sale to the consumer.
Non-vegetarian Food: Refers to an article of food which contains whole or part of any animal including birds, insects, fresh water or marine animals or eggs or products of any animal origin, but does not include certain specified items.
Package/Container: Refers to a pre-packed box, bottle, jar, casket, tin, barrel, case, pouch, receptacle, sack, bag, wrapper or such other things in which an article of food is packed.
Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA): Refers to the average daily dietary nutrient intake level sufficient to meet the nutrient requirement of nearly all healthy individuals in a particular life stage and gender group.
Pre-packaged Food: Refers to food placed in a package in such a manner that the contents cannot be changed without tampering it and which is ready for sale to the consumer.
Principal Display Panel: Refers to that part of the container/package which is intended or likely to be displayed or presented or shown or examined by the customer under normal and customary conditions of display, sale or purchase of the food article contained therein.
Retail Pack/Retail Unit: Refers to the packages intended for sale to the ultimate consumer for the purpose of consumption of the food contained therein.
Use By/Expiry Date: Refers to the date which signifies the end of the estimated period under any stated storage conditions, after which the product may not remain safe and the food product probably will not have the quality of safety attributes normally expected by the consumers.
Vegetarian Food: Refers to any article of food other than Non-Vegetarian Food as defined in these regulations.
General Requirements for Labeling of Prepackaged Foods:

Every pre-packaged food shall be labeled with information as required under these regulations unless otherwise provided.
When a food product is sold through e-commerce or any other direct selling means, the mandatory requirements of the label as given in these regulations shall be provided to the consumer through appropriate means before sale.
Pre-packaged food shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labeling in a manner that is false, misleading, or deceptive.
Any information or pictorial device displayed on the label shall not be in conflict with the requirements of these regulations.
The particulars of declaration required on the label shall be in English or Hindi in Devnagri script.
Label on pre-packaged foods shall be applied in such a manner that it will not become separated from the container.
Contents on the label shall be clear, unambiguous, prominent, conspicuous, indelible, and readily legible by the consumer under normal conditions of purchase and use.
Regulation: Food Safety and Standards (Labeling and Display) Regulations, 2020
Product: Pre-packaged foods
Short Title and Commencement

These regulations prescribe the labeling requirements of pre-packaged foods and display of essential information on premises where food is manufactured, processed, served, and stored.
They came into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette, and Food Business Operators needed to comply with all the provisions after one year from the date of their publication, except for chapter-3, to which Food Business Operators needed to comply by 1st January, 2022.
Definitions

Act: Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (Act 34 of 2006)
Assorted pack: Package or container containing multiple units of different food products intended and displayed for retail sale
Best before date: Date signifying the end of the period under any stated storage conditions during which the food product shall remain fully marketable
Children or child: Person under the age of 18 years
Date of manufacture: Date on which the food product becomes the product as described
Date of packaging: Date on which the food product is placed in the immediate container
E-commerce: Buying and selling of goods and services over digital and electronic network
Foods for catering purposes: Foods for use in restaurants, canteens, schools, hospitals, quick service restaurants (QSR), etc.
Front of Pack: Part of the package that faces forward and is typically the first thing a consumer will see
Infant: Person not more than twelve months of age
Labelling: Any written, printed, or graphic matter present on the label, accompanies the food, or is displayed near the food
Lot number, code number, batch number: Identification mark shown on the label
Multi-unit package: Package containing two or more individually packaged or labeled units of the same food commodity
Non-retail containers: Containers not intended to be offered for direct sale to the consumer
Non-vegetarian food: Article of food which contains whole or part of any animal
Package/container: Pre-packed box, bottle, jar, casket, tin, barrel, case, pouch, etc., in which an article of food is packed
Recommended dietary allowances (RDA): Average daily dietary nutrient intake level sufficient to meet the nutrient requirement of nearly all healthy individuals in a particular life stage and gender group
Pre-packaged food: Food placed in a package in such a manner that the contents cannot be changed without tampering
Principal display panel: Part of the container/package which is intended or likely to be displayed or presented or shown or examined by the customer
Retail pack or Retail unit: Packages intended for sale to the ultimate consumer
Use by or expiry: Date signifying the end of the estimated period under any stated storage conditions after which the product may not remain safe
The FSSAI may establish an internal mechanism to address problems arising from the implementation/interpretation of the regulations.

General Requirements

Every pre-packaged food shall be labeled with information as required unless otherwise provided.
When a food product is sold through e-commerce or any other direct selling means, the mandatory requirements of the label shall be provided to the consumer through appropriate means before sale.
Pre-packaged food shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labeling in a manner that is false, misleading, or deceptive.
Any information or pictorial device displayed on the label shall not be in conflict with the requirements of these regulations.
The particulars of declaration required on the label shall be in English or Hindi in Devnagri script.
Label on pre-packaged foods shall be applied in such a manner that it will not become separated from the container.
Contents on the label shall be clear, unambiguous, prominent, conspicuous, indelible, and readily legible by the consumer.
Labelling Requirements

Every package shall carry the name of the food which indicates the true nature of the food contained in the package, on the Front of Pack.
A list of ingredients shall be declared on the label in descending order of their composition by weight or volume at the time of its manufacture.
Nutritional information per 100g or 100ml or per single consumption pack of the product and per serve percentage (%) contribution to Recommended Dietary Allowance calculated on the basis of 2000kcal energy, 67 g total fat, 22 g saturated fat, 2 g trans fat, 50 g added sugar, and 2000 mg of sodium (5 g salt) requirement for an average adult per day, shall be given on the label containing energy value (kcal), the amounts of protein (g), carbohydrate (g) and total sugars (g), added sugars (g), total fat (g), saturated fat (g), trans fat (other than naturally occurring trans fat) (g), and cholesterol (mg).
These regulations ensure that pre-packaged foods are labeled correctly and provide consumers with essential information about the food they are purchasing.

Regulation Keyword: Sodium (mg)
Regulation: Wherever numerical information on vitamins and minerals is declared, it shall be expressed in metric units.
Regulation: Nutrition information panel shall include the amount of food in gram (g) or milliliter (ml) for reference beside the serving measure and the number of servings in the package. Explanation: “serving or serve size” means an amount of food customarily consumed per eating occasion or as defined on the label which is expressed in metric unit. Additionally, it may also be given in common household measures like teaspoon, tablespoon, cup that is appropriate to the food. Provided that the food claimed to be enriched with nutrients, such as, minerals, proteins, vitamins, amino acids or enzymes shall give the quantities of such added nutrients on the label.
Regulation: Per serve percentage (%) contribution to RDA and number of servings per pack may not be given for Infant Nutrition products as defined under Food Safety and Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 2020.
Regulation Keyword: Unprocessed products
Regulation: Unprocessed products that comprise a single ingredient are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Processed products
Regulation: Processed products which the only processing they have been subjected to is maturing and that comprise a single ingredient are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Waters
Regulation: Waters intended for human consumption, including those where the only added ingredients are carbon dioxide, are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Herb, spice, Curry Powder
Regulation: A herb, a spice or mixtures thereof / Curry Powder except Sprinkler masala (masalas meant for direct consumption) are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Salt
Regulation: Salt and salt substitutes are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Table top sweeteners
Regulation: Table top sweeteners are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Coffee, chicory extracts
Regulation: Coffee extracts and chicory extracts, whole or milled coffee beans and whole or milled decaffeinated coffee beans, coffee, decaffeinated coffee, soluble coffee powder, coffee chicory mixture are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Herbal, fruit infusions, tea
Regulation: Herbal and fruit infusions, tea, decaffeinated tea, instant or soluble tea or tea extract, decaffeinated instant or soluble tea or tea extract, which do not contain other added ingredients than flavourings which do not modify the nutritional value of the tea, are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Fermented vinegars
Regulation: Fermented vinegars and substitutes for vinegar, including those where the only added ingredients are flavourings, are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Flavourings, Food additives, Processing aids, Food enzymes, Gelatine, Yeast
Regulation: Flavourings, Food additives, Processing aids, Food enzymes, Gelatine, Yeast are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Raw agricultural minimally processed products
Regulation: Raw agricultural minimally processed products such as wheat, rice, cereals, pulses, fruits and vegetables and/or products that comprise a single ingredient are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling. Minimally processed foods are the ones that are slightly altered for the main purpose of preservation but which do not substantially change the nutritional content of the food. This may involve cleaning and removing inedible or unwanted parts, grinding, refrigeration, pasteurization, fermentation, freezing, and vacuum-packaging.
Regulation Keyword: Chewing gum and bubble gum
Regulation: Chewing gum and bubble gum are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Alcoholic Beverages
Regulation: Alcoholic Beverages are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Foods for Special Dietary Uses (FSDU), Foods for Special Medical Purposes(FSMP)
Regulation: Foods for Special Dietary Uses (FSDU), Foods for Special Medical Purposes(FSMP), subject to the compliance of requirements specified in the Food Safety and Standards (Health Supplements, Nutraceuticals, Food for Special Dietary Use, Food for Special Medical Purpose, Functional Food and Novel Food) Regulations, 2016 are exempted from mandatory nutritional labeling.
Regulation Keyword: Edible oils, interesterified vegetable fat, hydrogenated or partially hydrogenated oils, edible fats, margarine, fat spreads, fats, oils, fat emulsions
Regulation: Every package of edible oils, interesterified vegetable fat, both hydrogenated or partially hydrogenated oils, edible fats, margarine and fat spreads (mixed fat spread and vegetable fat spread) and package of food in which fats, oils and fat emulsions are used as an ingredient shall declare the quantity of trans fat content and saturated fat content on the label. Provided that the content of saturated fat and trans fat may be declared on the label as “not more than”. Provided further that every package of edible oils, interesterified vegetable fat, both hydrogenated or partially hydrogenated oils, edible fats, margarine and fat spreads (mixed fat spread and vegetable fat spread) shall declare the quantity of monounsaturated fatty, polyunsaturated fatty acid, omega-3 fatty acid and omega-6 fatty acid content on the label. However, nutritional information shall be required in the above-mentioned products if a nutrition or health claim is made on the label.
Regulation: The compliance to quantity of declared nutrients on the label shall have the tolerance of maximum minus 10 percent of the value for that nutrient declared on the label at any point in time within declared shelf life of the product.
Regulation Keyword: Energy
Regulation: The amount of energy should be listed and calculated using the following conversion factors: (A) Carbohydrates 4 kcal/g (B) Polyols except Erythritol 2 kcal/g (C) Erythritol 0kcal/g (D) Protein 4 kcal/g (E) Fat 9 kcal/g (F) Alcohol (Ethanol) 7 kcal/g (G) Organic acid 3 kcal/g (H) Dietary fibre 2kcal/g
Regulation Keyword: Protein
Regulation: The amount of protein should be listed and calculated using the formula: Protein = Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen x 6.25 (Unless a different factor scientifically justified, may be used). Provided that for calculating protein content in milk a conversion factor of 6.38 needs to be used.
Regulation: Nutritional information may additionally be provided in the form of Barcode/Global Trade Identification Number (GTIN).
Regulation: Every package of Non-Vegetarian Food containing ingredients including food additives, processing aids of animal origin shall bear a declaration to this effect made by a symbol and colour code. The symbol shall consist of a brown colour filled triangle inside a square with brown outline.
Regulation: Every package of Vegetarian Food containing ingredients including food additives,
Regulation Keyword: Principal Display Panel
Regulation: The area of the principal display panel shall not be less than a specified percentage of the package's dimensions based on its shape.
Regulation Keyword: Minimum Height of Numeral and Letter
Regulation: Specifies the minimum height of numerals and letters required on the principal display panel based on the area of the panel.
Regulation Keyword: Mandatory Declarations
Regulation: Packaged food containing certain ingredients or additives must prominently display them on the label, with specified minimum sizes for declarations.
Regulation Keyword: Exemptions from Certain Labeling Requirements
Regulation: Specifies exemptions for small packages from certain labeling requirements like listing ingredients, lot number, nutritional information, etc.
Regulation Keyword: Display of Information in Food Service Establishments
Regulation: Food service establishments with a certain number of outlets must display calorific value and allergen information for food items.
Regulation Keyword: Labelling Requirements of Non-Retail Container
Regulation: Specifies mandatory information for packaged food meant for non-retail sale, including name of food, FSSAI logo, lot number, etc., either on the container or label.
Here is the structured text with normalized and added regulation keywords:

Regulation Keyword: Principal Display Panel
Regulation: The area of the principal display panel shall not be less than a specified percentage of the package's dimensions based on its shape.
Regulation Keyword: Minimum Height of Numeral and Letter
Regulation: Specifies the minimum height of numerals and letters required on the principal display panel based on the area of the panel.
Regulation Keyword: Mandatory Declarations
Regulation: Packaged food containing certain ingredients or additives must prominently display them on the label, with specified minimum sizes for declarations.
Regulation Keyword: Exemptions from Certain Labeling Requirements
Regulation: Specifies exemptions for small packages from certain labeling requirements like listing ingredients, lot number, nutritional information, etc.
Regulation Keyword: Display of Information in Food Service Establishments
Regulation: Food service establishments with a certain number of outlets must display calorific value and allergen information for food items.
Regulation Keyword: Labelling Requirements of Non-Retail Container
Regulation: Specifies mandatory information for packaged food meant for non-retail sale, including name of food, FSSAI logo, lot number, etc., either on the container or label.
Here is the structured text with normalized and added regulation keywords:

Regulation Keyword: Labelling of Food Additives
Regulation: Every package of a food additive meant for retail sale to the consumer shall be labelled in accordance with the Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020 except for sub-regulation 5(1) and 5(3) of this regulation. The label shall provide the specific name of the food additive as mentioned in the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011 or the common or commercial name if not listed.
Regulation Keyword: Mandatory Declarations for Food Additives
Regulation: The label of every package of food additive shall prominently mark "FOR USE IN FOOD" and list the names of food additives present in the package in descending order of their composition by weight or volume. Synthetic food colors shall also include the chemical name and color index of the dye stuff.
Regulation Keyword: Labelling of Pre-packaged Food Additives Sold other than by Retail
Regulation: Every package of a food additive meant for sale other than in Retail shall carry a label in accordance with chapter 4 and regulation 10 of these regulations except the clause 10(2) ©.
Regulation Keyword: Labelling of Fortified Food
Regulation: Every package of fortified food shall carry the words "fortified with ………… (name of the fortificant)" and the specified logo on the label.
Regulation Keyword: Labelling of Certified Organic Food
Regulation: Every package of certified organic food as per Food Safety and Standards (Organic Foods) Regulations, 2017 shall carry the specified logo on the label.
Regulation Keyword: Mandatory Declarations for Food Containing Certain Ingredients/Additives
Regulation: Every package of food containing certain ingredients/additives shall bear specific declarations on the label in a rectangular box, including declarations for polyols, polydextrose, added caffeine, isomaltulose, and others.
Regulation Keyword: Labelling of Edible Oils and Fats
Regulation: The package, label, or advertisement of edible refined vegetable oils and fats shall not use any exaggerated expressions. Vanaspati made from more than 30 percent of Rice bran oil shall bear a specific label.
Regulation Keyword: Labelling of Coffee-Chicory Mixture
Regulation: Every package containing a mixture of coffee and chicory shall have a specific label with a declaration of the percentage of coffee and chicory.
Regulation Keyword: Labelling of Milk and Milk Products
Regulation: All milk powders, skimmed milk powders, condensed milk, or similar products shall carry a specific declaration on the label regarding their use for infants below six months.
Regulation Keyword: Labelling Prohibitions for Drinking Water
Regulation: No claims concerning medicinal effects shall be made. The name of the locality may not form part of the trade name unless it refers to packaged water collected at that place.
Regulation Keyword: Labelling of 'Gluten Free' Products
Regulation: The term "Gluten Free" shall be printed in the immediate proximity of the name of the product for products described in regulation 2.14 of the Food Safety and Standards Act.
Regulation: Food Products Standards and Food Additives Regulations, 2011
Labeling Requirement: In case any gluten free product is manufactured in a plant where gluten containing products are also manufactured, it shall be declared on the label as “Processed in a plant where gluten containing products are manufactured.”
Bread Nomenclature and Specialty Ingredient Percentage:
Whole Wheat Bread:
Specialty Ingredient: Whole wheat flour (Atta)
Minimum amount of Specialty Ingredient as % of Flour: At least 75%
Wheat Bread or Brown Bread:
Specialty Ingredient: Whole wheat flour (Atta)
Minimum amount of Specialty Ingredient as % of Flour: At least 50%
White Bread:
Specialty Ingredient: Refined wheat flour (Maida)
No specific minimum amount required
Multigrain Bread:
Specialty Ingredient: Food grains permitted under FSS (Food Product Standards & Food Additives) Regulations, 2011
Minimum 20% should be grains other than wheat*
Specialty Bread:
Specialty ingredients vary based on the prefix added to the term “bread” on the label
Specific minimum amounts for various specialty ingredients (e.g., milk solids, honey, cheese, oats, etc.) are listed
Calculation of specialty ingredient is on a 100g flour basis
Minimum amount of Specialty Ingredient in case of Multigrain Bread shall be 10% in the 1st year of enforcement and thereafter 20%
Principal Regulations and Amendments:
The principal regulations were published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary vide notification number F. No. 1-94/FSSAI/SP(Labelling)/2014(Pt-2), dated the 17th November, 2020
Subsequently amended vide notification number:
F. No. Std/SP-08/A-1.2019/N-02, dated 10th September,2021.
F. No. Std/SP-08/A-1.2021/N-01, dated 09th September,2022.
F. No. Std/SP-08/A-1-2020/N-01, dated 11th October, 2022