MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS AUTHORITY OF INDIA) 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 2nd August, 2018 
F. No. 11/03/Reg/Fortification/2014.—Whereas the Food Safety and Standards (Fortification of Foods) 
Regulations, 2016 were published as required under sub section (1) of section 92 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 
2006 (34 of 2006), vide notification No. 11/03/Reg/Fortification/2014, dated the 23rd December, 2016, in the Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, inviting objections and suggestions from the persons likely to be affected 
thereby, before the expiry of the period of thirty days from the date on which the copies of the Gazette containing the 
said notification were made available to the public;
And whereas copies of the said Gazette were made available to the public on the 3rd January, 2017; 
And whereas objections and suggestions received from the public in respect of the said draft regulations have 
been considered by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India; 
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (e) of sub- section (2) of section 92 of the said 
Act, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India hereby makes the following regulations, namely:- 
PART 1: GENERAL 
1. Short title and commencement. - (1) These regulations may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Fortification of 
Foods) Regulations, 2018. 
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette and Food Business Operator shall 
comply with all the provisions of these regulations by 1st January, 2019. 
(3) The provisions of these regulations shall supersede standards on fortification of food set out in any regulations, 
orders, or guidelines issued under the Act thereunder save as regards regulations on nutraceuticals and foods for Special 
Dietary Uses. 
2. Definitions. – (1) In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires: - 
(a) “Act” means the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006); 
(b) “fortification” means deliberately increasing the content of essential micronutrients in a food so as to improve the
nutritional quality of food and to provide public health benefit with minimal risk to health; 
(c) “fortificant” means a substance added to food to provide micronutrients but does not include nutraceuticals or foods 
for Special Dietary Uses; 
(d) “fortified food” means a food, as specified under the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food 
Additives) Regulations, 2011, that has undergone the process of fortification as per the provisions of these regulations; 
(e) “Government-funded programme” means any programme, policy, scheme or other provision under which food is 
sold, distributed or otherwise made available to the public by the Central or State Governments; 
(f) “micronutrients” means essential dietary nutrients including vitamins, minerals or trace elements that are required in 
very small quantities and are vital to development, disease prevention and wellbeing of human beings; 
(g) “quality assurance” means the systematic measures applied and steps taken by manufacturers and packers of 
fortified food throughout the manufacturing or packing process to ensure that the finished food complies with the 
provisions of the Act and regulations and standards specified thereunder; 
(h) “staple foods” means articles of food intended for mass consumption on a daily basis and include rice, wheat, wheat
flour, atta, maida, oil, salt, milk, and such other articles of food as may be designated staple foods under these 
regulations; 
(2) All other words and expressions used and, not defined in these regulations shall have the meanings assigned to them 
in the Act, rules or regulations made thereunder. 
PART 2: STANDARDS ON FORTIFICATION 
3. General principles.- (1) Micronutrients may be appropriately added to foods for the purpose of contributing to any of 
the following as mentioned in Schedule-I:
(a) Regulation of micronutrients: Preventing or reducing the risk of, or correcting, a demonstrated deficiency of one or more micronutrients in the 
population or specific population group; 
(b) Regulation of micronutrients: reducing the risk of, or correcting, inadequate nutritional status of one or more micronutrients in the population 
or specific population group; 
(c) Regulation of micronutrients: meeting requirements or recommended intake of one or more micronutrients; 
(d) Regulation of health: maintaining or improving health; 
(e) Regulation of nutritional quality: maintaining or improving the nutritional quality of foods. 
(2) When fortification of a food is made mandatory, it shall be based on severity and extent of public health need as 
demonstrated by generally accepted scientific evidence. 
(3) The Food Authority may, specify mandatory fortification of any staple food on direction of the Government of 
India. 
(4) Wherever “Iron (As Fe)” is used as a source of nutrient, heme iron shall not be used in any form in any article of 
food. 
4. Compliance with Standards on Micronutrient Content in Fortified Food.-
(1) Regulation of micronutrient levels: Any manufacturer who fortifies any food shall ensure that the level of micronutrient in such fortified food does not 
fall below the minimum level specified in Schedule- I. 
PART 3: GENERAL OBLIGATIONS
5. Quality Assurance.- (1) Regulation of quality assurance: Every manufacturer and packer of fortified food shall give an undertaking on quality 
assurance and submit evidence of steps taken in this regard to the Food Authority or such other authority which the Food 
Authority may designate. 
(2) The undertaking shall be given twice a year and shall include, the following, namely:- 
(a) Regulation of certification: certification by a food laboratory notified by the Food Authority that the fortified food is in compliance with 
the provisions of the Act and regulations and standards specified therein; 
(b) Regulation of record keeping: up-to-date record keeping and continuous inventory of fortificants used in the manufacturing or packing 
process, including the source of its procurement; 
(c) Regulation of monitoring procedures: appropriate monitoring procedures at different stages of manufacturing or packing process; 
(d) Regulation of testing: random testing of fortificants and fortified food; 
(e) Regulation of audits: regular audit of technical equipment and processes; 
(f) Regulation of good manufacturing practices: such good manufacturing practices, as may be specified by the Food Authority from time to time. 
(g) Regulation of purity criteria: provisions for the reference of the purity criteria of micronutrients, generally accepted by pharmacopoeias, 
namely, Indian Pharmacopoeia, British Pharmacopoeia, Food Chemical Codex, Joint Food and Agriculture 
Organization or World Health Organisation Expert Committee on Food Additives or CODEX Alimentarius may
be adopted by food Business operators. 
6. Compliance with the generally applicable provisions of the Act, Regulations and Standards.- Regulation of compliance: All fortified food, 
whether voluntarily fortified or required to undergo mandatory fortification shall be manufactured, packed, labeled, 
handled, distributed and sold, whether for profit or under a Government-funded programme, only in compliance with the 
standards specified under the provisions of the Act and regulations made thereunder. 
7. Packaging and Labeling Requirements. – (1) Regulation of packaging: All fortified food shall be packaged in a manner that takes into 
consideration the nature of the fortificant added and its effect on the shelf life of such food. 
(2) Regulation of labeling: Every package of fortified food shall carry the words “fortified with ………… (name of the fortificant)” and the logo, 
specified in Schedule-II of these regulation, on its label. It may also carry a tag line “Sampoorna Poshan Swasth 
Jeevan” under the logo. 
(3) Regulation of packaging and labeling: provisions of the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011, shall also apply to the 
fortified foods. 
(4) Regulation of labeling: Every package of food, fortified with Iron shall carry a statement “People with Thalassemia may take under 
medical supervision”.
(5) Regulation of nutrition claims: All manufacturers and packers of fortified food complying with the provisions of the Act and rules or regulations 
made thereunder on fortified food shall be permitted to make a nutrition claim in relation to an article of fortified food 
under the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011. 
8. Promotion of Fortified Food. - (1) Regulation of promotion: The Food Authority shall take steps to encourage the production, manufacture, 
distribution, sale and consumption of fortified food including fortification through conventional breeding or 
hybridization, in cooperation with concerned departments of the Government of India/Government of States/UTs.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-regulation (1), the Food Authority shall endeavor to: 
(a) Regulation of promotion: advise and promote the use of fortified food in Government-funded programmes on distribution of food; 
(b) Regulation of public awareness: organise public awareness, educate and advocate campaigns on nutrition and fortified food; 
(c) Regulation of technical assistance: conduct technical assistance programmes and provide technical expertise to small manufacturers to enable 
them to undertake fortification; 
(d) Regulation of nutrient analysis: equip laboratories and research institutions notified under the Act to conduct the nutrient analysis of fortified 
food; and


////table/////