MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(Food Safety and Standards Authority of India)
Notification
New Delhi, dated the 1st August, 2011
F.No. 2-15015/30/2010
Whereas in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (o) of sub section (2) of section 92 read with section 31 of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006) the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India proposes to make Food Safety and Standards Regulations in so far as they relates to Food Safety and Standards(Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011, and;

Whereas these draft Regulations were published in consolidated form at pages 1 to 776 in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part III – Sec. 4 dated 20th October 2010 inviting objections and suggestions from all persons likely to be affected thereby before the expiry of the period of thirty days from the date on which the copies of the Gazette containing the said notification were made available to the public;

And whereas the copies of the Gazette were made available to the public on the 21st October 2010;

And whereas objections and suggestions received from the stakeholders within the specified period on the said draft Regulations have been considered and finalized by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India.

Now therefore, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India hereby makes the following Regulations, namely,-

FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF FOOD BUSINESSES), REGULATIONS 2011

CHAPTER 1

GENERAL

1.1: Short title and commencement
1.1.1: These regulations may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011.
1.1.2: These regulations shall come into force on or after 5th August, 2011

1.2: Definitions
1.2.1: In these regulations unless the context otherwise requires:
1. “Central Licensing Authority” means Designated Officer appointed by the Chief Executive Officer of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India in his capacity of Food Safety Commissioner.
2. “District” means a revenue district in state and UTs provided that the Commisioner of Food Safety may, for the purpose of this Act declare any local area as a district on the basis of:
z Concentration of specific category of food businesses which may need special attention.
z Risk assessment carried out by the Authority from time to time.
z Any other specific regulatory requirements.
3. “Licensing Authority” means the Designated Officer appointed under section 36 (i) of the Act by the Commissioner of Food Safety of the state or by the Chief Executive Officer of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India in his capacity of Food Safety Commissioner ;
4. “Petty Food Manufacturer” means any food manufacturer, who
(a) manufactures or sells any article of food himself or a petty retailer, hawker, itinerant vendor or temporary stall holder; or distributes foods including in any religious or social gathering except a caterer; or
(b) such other food businesses including small scale or cottage or such other industries relating to food business or tiny food businesses with an annual turnover not exceeding Rs 12 lakhs and/or whose
(i) production capacity of food (other than milk and milk products and meat and meat products) does not exceed 100 kg/ltr per day or
(ii) procurement or handling and collection of milk is up to 500 litres of milk per day or
(iii) slaughtering capacity is 2 large animals or 10 small animals or 50 poultry birds per day or less.
5. Registering Authority” means Designated Officer/ Food Safety Officer or any official in Panchayat, Municipal Corporation or any other local body or Panchayat in an area, notified as such by the State Food Safety Commissioner for the purpose of registration as specified in these Regulations.
6. “State Licensing Authority” means Designated Officers appointed under Section 36(1) of the Act by the Food Safety Commissioner of a State or UT.
The expressions used in these Regulations but have not been defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Act or as provided in the regulations, chapters and Appendices.

Chapter-2

LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF FOOD BUSINESS

1 Registration and Licensing of Food Business
All Food Business Operators in the country will be registered or licensed in accordance with the procedures laid down hereinafter;
2.1.1 Registration of Petty Food Business
(1) Every petty Food Business Operator shall register themselves with the Registering Authority by submitting an application for registration in Form A under Schedule 2 of these Regulations along with a fee as provided in Schedule 3.
(2) The petty food manufacturer shall follow the basic hygiene and safety requirements provided in Part I of Schedule 4 of these Regulations and provide a self attested declaration of adherence to these requirements with the application in the format provided in Annexure-1 under Schedule 2.
(3) The Registering Authority shall consider the application and may either grant registration or reject it with reasons to be recorded in writing or issue notice for inspection, within 7 days of receipt of an application for registration.
(4) In the event of an inspection being ordered, the registration shall be granted by the Registering Authority after being satisfied with the safety, hygiene and sanitary conditions of the premises as contained in Part II of Schedule 4 within a period of 30 days.
If registration is not granted, or denied, or inspection not ordered within 7 days as provided in above sub regulation (3) or no decision is communicated within 30 days as provided in above sub regulation (4), the petty food manufacturer may start its business, provided that it will be incumbent on the Food Business Operator to comply with any improvement suggested by the Registering Authority even later.
Provided that registration shall not be refused without giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard and for reasons to be recorded in writing.
(5) The Registering Authority shall issue a registration certificate and a photo identity card, which shall be displayed at a prominent place at all times within the premises or vehicle or cart or any other place where the person carries on sale/manufacture of food in case of Petty Food Business.
(6) The Registering Authority or any officer or agency specifically authorized for this purpose shall carry out food safety inspection of the registered establishments at least once in a year.
Provided that a producer of milk who is a registered member of a dairy Cooperative Society registered under Cooperative Societies Act and supplies or sells the entire milk to the Society shall be exempted from this provision for registration
2.1.2 License for food business
(1) Subject to Regulation 2.1.1, no person shall commence any food business unless he possesses a valid license.
Provided that any person or Food Business Operator carrying on food business on the date of notification of these Regulations, under a license, registration or permission, as the case may be, under the Acts or Orders mentioned in the Second Schedule of the Act shall get their existing license converted into the license/registration under these regulations by making an application to the Licensing/Registering Authority after
Certainly! Here's the content in a numbered format:

---

6. Food Business Operator having a valid certificate of an accredited food safety auditor or from an agency accredited by Food Authority or any other organization notified by Food Authority for this purpose will not be normally required to be inspected before renewal of the license. Provided that the Designated Officer may order an inspection before renewal if considered necessary for reasons to be recorded in writing.

7. Suspension or cancellation of Registration Certificate or license
   1. The Registering or Licensing Authority in accordance with the provisions of section 32 of the Act may, after giving the concerned Food Business Operator a reasonable opportunity of being heard, suspend any registration or license in respect of all or any of the activities for which the registration/license has been granted under these Regulations after recording a brief statement of the reasons for such suspension, if there is reason to believe that the Food Business Operator has failed to comply with the conditions within the period mentioned in any Improvement Notice served under Section 32 of the Act. A copy of such statement shall be furnished to the concerned Food Business Operator whose Registration or license has been suspended.
   2. The registering or Licensing Authority, as the case may be, may direct an inspection of the Food Business Operator’s premise(s) within a reasonable period which shall not be less than 14 days from the date of the order of suspension.
   3. In the event that the Registering or Licensing Authority is of the opinion, on a review of the inspection report, that the Food Business Operator has still failed to rectify the defects or omissions or comply with the conditions of the improvement notice causing the suspension, such authority may cancel the license/registration of the Food Business Operator after giving him an opportunity to show cause as provided under Section 32 (3) of the Act.
   4. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Regulations, the Registering or Licensing Authority may suspend or cancel any registration or license forthwith in the interest of public health for reasons to be recorded in writing.
   5. A suspension or cancellation of registration or license under these Regulations shall not entitle the Food Business Operator to any compensation or refund of fee(s) paid in respect of the registration certificate or license or renewal thereof.
   6. After a period of 3 months from the date of cancellation under Regulation 2.1.8 (3) above the Food Business Operator may make a fresh application for Registration or license to the concerned authority if all observations made in the improvement notice have been complied with.

8. Modifications, Expansion, or Changes in premise(s) after grant of license or registration
   1. Food Business Operators shall ensure that the Registering or Licensing Authority always has up-to-date information on their food business establishments and shall inform the relevant Authority of any modifications or additions or changes in product category, layout, expansion, closure, or any other material information based on which the license was granted and such information shall be conveyed before the changes occur.
   2. Provided that any change that alters the information contained in the license certificate shall require an approval or endorsement in the license prior to the start of business with such changes. The Food Business Operator shall submit the original license to the Licensing Authority along with a fee equivalent to a one-year license fee for effecting necessary changes. The Licensing Authority may approve and issue an amended license incorporating such changes in activities within 30 days from the date of receipt of such information. While approving the aforementioned changes the concerned registering or Licensing Authority shall take into account the feasibility of carrying on the business and the legal and other relevant aspects of the desired modifications or additions or changes in activities and, if required, may order an inspection of the premises before granting the approval.

9. Mode of payment: All fees and charges payable under these regulations shall be paid via pay order or demand draft or any online mode of payment as may be prescribed in this regard, by the concerned Food Safety Commissioner.

10. Transfer of registration certificate or License in case of death
    1. In the event of the death of the holder of a Registration certificate or license, such certificate or license shall subsist for the benefit of the legal representative or any family member of the deceased or until the expiry of:—
        - The period of 90 days from the date of death of the holder of a Registration certificate or license; or
        - Such longer period as the Designated Officer may allow, for reasons to be recorded in writing.
    2. The legal representative or family member of the deceased holder of the registration certificate or license shall apply to the concerned Authority for transfer of such certificate or license in his favour.
    3. The registering or Licensing Authority, as the case may be, may, after making such an enquiry as it may deem fit, either approve the transfer of the Registration certificate or license if satisfied that the applicant is the legal representative, or refuse the request. Provided that the registering or licensing authority shall not refuse the request without giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard and for reasons to be recorded in writing.
    4. Upon filing of an application for transfer and pending the decision of the authority, the registration or license shall continue to be in force.

11. Appeal
    1. A Food Business Operator aggrieved by an order of the Registering Authority or Licensing Authority, as the case may be, under these Regulations may prefer an appeal to the concerned Designated Officer or the Food Safety Commissioner, as per provisions laid down under Section 31(8) and 32 (4) - (5) of the Act.

12. Return
    1. Every licensee shall on or before 31st May of each year, submit a return electronically or in physical form as may be prescribed by the concerned Food Safety Commissioner, in ‘Form D-1’ provided in Schedule 2 of these Regulations to the Licensing Authority in respect of each class of food products handled by him during the previous financial year.
    2. Provided however that every licensee engaged in the manufacturing of milk and/or milk products shall file half-yearly returns for the periods 1st April to 30th September and 1st October to 31st March of every financial year in the form D-2, as provided in Schedule-2 of these regulations. Such returns will be filed within a month from the end of the period.
    3. A separate return shall be filed for every license issued under the Regulations, irrespective of whether the same Food Business Operator holds more than one license.
    4. Any delay in filing a return beyond 31st May of each year shall attract a penalty of Rs 100 per day of delay.

13. Food Business Operator to be bound by directions or order
    1. Every Food Business Operator to whom any direction or order is issued in pursuance of any provisions of this regulation shall be bound to comply with such directions or regulation and any failure on the part of the Food Business Operator to comply with such direction or order shall be deemed to be a contravention of the provisions of these Regulations and will attract legal action under the provisions of the Act.
    2. Guarantee: Every manufacturer, distributor, or dealer selling an article of food to a vendor shall give either separately or in the bill, cash memo, or label a warranty in Form E. (Refer Form A for form of Guarantee)

14. Power of State/UT governments to constitute advisory committee: The state/UT Governments, may, if required designate an existing advisory committee at panchayat/district/state level or where such a committee does not exist, constitute an advisory committee to assist, aid or advise on any matter concerning food safety.

15. Jurisdiction of Designated officer: The Commissioner of Food Safety shall, by an order, appoint the Designated officer, who shall not be below the rank of a Sub-Divisional Officer, to be in charge of food safety administration for each district as defined under regulation 1.2.1 (2)

16. Documents to be enclosed for a new application for a license to State/Central Licensing Authority
    1. Form-B duly completed and signed (in duplicate) by the proprietor/ partner or the authorized signatory.
    2. Blueprint/layout plan of the processing unit showing the dimensions in meters/square meters and operation-wise area allocation.
    3. List of Directors with full address and contact details.
    4. Name and List of Equipment and Machinery along with the number, installed capacity, and horsepower used.
    5. Photo I.D and address proof issued by Government authority of Proprietor/Partner/Director(s)/Authorized Signatory.
    6. List of food categories desired to be manufactured. (In case of manufacturers).
    7. Authority letter with name and address of the responsible person nominated by the manufacturer along with an alternative responsible person indicating the powers vested with them viz assisting the officers in inspections, collection of samples, packing & dispatch.
    8. Analysis report (Chemical & Bacteriological) of water to be used as an ingredient in food from a recognized/public health laboratory to confirm the portability indicating the name of an authorized representative of Lab who collected the sample and date of collecting the sample.
    9. Proof of possession of premises. (Sale deed/ Rent agreement/ Electricity bill, etc.)
    10. Partnership Deed/Affidavit/Memorandum & Articles of Association towards the constitution of the firm.
    11. Copy of certificate obtained under Coop Act - 1861/Multi State Coop Act - 2002 in case of Cooperatives.
    12. NOC from manufacturer in case of Re-labellers.
    13. Food Safety Management System plan or certificate if any,
    14. Source of milk or procurement plan for milk including the location of milk collection centers, etc in case of Milk and Milk Products processing units.
    15. Source of raw material for meat and meat processing plants.
    16. Pesticide residues report of water to be used